tible to the same type of vibration. The new arrivals excite
their hosts to imitate their motion and in this way when a
violent tune encounters the fire of our blood, it makes it take
up the same dance and excites it to thrust itself outwards, and
that is what we call “the ardour of courage’. If the sound is
sweeter and has only the strength to raise a lesser, more
quavering flame, by causing this to travel along the nerves
and membranes and through the apertures in our flesh, it
excites that tickling sensation which we call “joy”. The other
passions are aroused in the same way, according to the greater
or lesser violence with which these little bodies are hurled at
us, according to the motion resulting from their contact with
other impulses and according to the mobility they find in us.
So much then for hearing.

“The demonstration of the sense of touch is now no more
difficult, if one imagines that there is a perpetual emission of
little bodies from all palpable matter and that when we touch
it, still more of them evaporate off it because they are
squeezed out of the object—just like water from a sponge
when we press it. The hard ones come to the organ of touch
to make a report of their solidity, the supple ones of their
softness, the rough ones, etc. Moreover, when our hands are
worn with work they are no longer so sensitive to touch, for
the thick callosity, being neither porous nor animated itself,
only transmits these vapours of matter with great difficulty.

‘Does someone desire to learn where the sense of touch has
its seat? For my part I think it is spread over all the surfaces of
the body, seeing that this can feel with all its parts. I do
believe, however, that the closer the organ we feel with is to
our heads, the quicker we can make things out. This can be
tested by closing our eyes and feeling something with our
hands, for we can guess what it is more easily than if we felt it
with our foot instead, when we should have some difficulty in
recognizing it. This is due to the fact that, our skin being
riddled all over with little holes, our nerves, whose substance
is no more compact, lose many of these little atoms on the
way, through the tiny gaps in their fabric, before they have
