now, though forbidden by the menfolk, they begin to let
down the boat into the sea. Achab was the most daring of
them and wanted to be the first to brave the dangers. She flung
herself nimbly into it and all her sex would have joined her if
a wave had not separated the boat from the ship.

“Vainly they shouted after her, calling her “lunatic” a hundred times and protesting that she would be the cause of all
women being one day reproached for having a quarter of the
moon in their heads: she merely laughed at them. And so she
floated away from the world. The animals followed her
example, for the majority of the birds, who felt their wings
strong enough and were impatient with the first prison in
which anyone had ever restrained their liberty, made their
way there. Even the bravest of the quadrupeds began swimming. Nearly a thousand had got away before Noah’s sons
could close the stable doors, which were being held open by
the multitude of escaping animals. Most of them reached this
new world. As for the skiff, it came to rest on a very pleasant
shore where the great-hearted Achab landed. Happy to have
recognized that this land was indeed the moon, she had no
desire to go back to her boat and rejoin her brothers. She
dwelt for some time in a cave and as she was walking one day,
considering whether she should be vexed at having lost the
company of her kinsfolk or glad of it, she caught sight of a
man knocking down acorns. Overjoyed by this encounter, she
flew to embrace him. She received as good as she gave, for it
was even longer since the old man had seen a human face.
This was Enoch the Just.

‘They lived together, and if the impious nature of his children and the arrogance of his wife had not driven him to seek
refuge in the woods, they would have spun out the thread of
their days together in all the sweetness with which God blesses
the marriages of the just. There, in the wildest retreats of those
dreadful solitudes, the good old man used every day to offer
up to God a purified spirit and his heart as a sacrifice, until
one day an apple fell from the Tree of Knowledge, which is in
this garden, as you know, into the river beside which it is
