blows, which now scarcely shook it, that the battle was drawing to a finish, it reared itself up on a corner of its cube and
let itself fall with all its weight upon the stomach of the salamander, to such good effect that the heart of the poor
salamander, where what remained of its fire was concentrated,
burst with such a terrible explosion that I know of nothing
comparable to it in nature.

Thus died the fire beast beneath the sluggish resistance of
the ice animal.

Some time after the remora had disappeared, we
approached the battlefield and the old man, after first smearing his hands with some of the earth on which it had walked,
to protect them from burns, grasped the carcass of the salamander.

‘With the body of this animal,’ he said, ‘I shall not need to
make a fire in my kitchen, for if I hang it from the pot hook it
will roast and boil everything I put in the hearth. As for its
eyes, I shall preserve them carefully. If they were cleansed of
the shadows of death you would take them for two little suns.
The ancients in our world were well aware of how to put
them to use. These are what they called “ardent lamps” and
they were only hung up in the grand tombs of illustrious men.

‘Our moderns have come across them when ransacking
some of these famous tombs, but thanks to their ignorant
curiosity they have destroyed them, for, in trying to come at
the fire, which they saw shining behind the membranes, they
have broken them.’

The old man was walking all the time and I followed him,
attentive to the marvels he related to me. And in connexion
with the battle, I must not forget to mention the conversation
we had concerning the ice animal.

‘I do not believe,’ he told me, ‘that you will ever have seen
a remora before, since these fish rarely rise to the surface of the
water and, in addition, they hardly ever leave the Arctic
Ocean. But without doubt you have seen certain animals
which can, in some measure, be said to be of the same species.
I told you just now that as one nears the Pole, this sea is quite


