‘What! You take burial for a mark of blessedness!’ this
man retorted. ‘By your faith, can you conceive of anything
more frightful than a corpse brim-full of crawling worms, at
the mercy of the toads which gnaw at its cheeks—in short, the
plague clothed in the body of a man? Good God! The very
idea, even in death, of having one’s face smothered with a
cloth and a clod of earth upon one’s mouth almost chokes my
breath! This wretched man you see being carried has, in
addition to the disgrace of being thrown into a ditch, been
condemned to be accompanied in procession by a hundred
and fifty of his friends. As a punishment for having loved an
envious and ungrateful man, they are commanded to appear
at his funeral with sad faces, and if the judges had not had
pity on him, imputing his crimes partly to his meagre intelligence, they would have ordered that there should be weeping!

‘Apart from criminals, everyone here is burnt and it is a
very decent and reasonable custom, for we believe that when
the fire has separated the purities from the impurities, the
heat draws together, by sympathetic attraction, all the
natural warmth which made up the soul and gives it sufficient
strength to rise steadily. When it has ascended as high as a star
(which is in fact the earth of some peoples more immaterial
and more intellectual than us, since their temperament must
correspond and contribute to the purity of the globe they
inhabit), the original flame is further refined by the subtlety
of this world’s elements and it comes to form one of the
citizens of this fiery country.

‘But this is still not our most beautiful method of sepulture.
When one of our philosophers reaches an age at which he
feels his mind growing weak and the ice of his years freezing
the passions of his soul, he summons his friends to a sumptuous banquet. When he has explained his reasons for resolving to take leave of nature and the small hope there is of his
adding anything more to his fine actions, he is either given
grace, that is to say he is ordered to die, or else he is given a
severe commandment to live. When his life’s breath has been
put into his own hands by a majority vote, he informs his

