the good Father’s zeal, and finally the Viceroy told me he was
much astonished, seeing how improbable Ptolemy’s system
was, that it should have been so generally accepted.

‘Sir,’ I replied to him, ‘the majority of men, who only judge
things by their senses, have allowed themselves to be persuaded by their eyes, and just as the man on board a ship
which hugs the coastline believes that he is motionless and the
shore is moving, so have men, revolving with the earth about
the sky, believed that it was the sky itself which revolved
about them. Added to this there is the intolerable pride of
human beings, who are convinced that nature was only made
for them—as if it were likely that the sun, a vast body four
hundred and thirty-four times greater than the earth, should
only have been set ablaze in order to ripen their medlars and
to make their cabbages grow heads!

‘As for me, far from agreeing with their impudence, I
believe that the planets are worlds surrounding the sun and
the fixed stars are also suns with planets surrounding them;
that is to say, worlds which we cannot see from here, on
account of their smallness, and because their light, being
borrowed, cannot reach us. For how, in good faith, can one
imagine these globes of such magnitude to be nothing but
great desert countries, while ours, simply because we, a handful of vainglorious ruffians are crawling about on it, has been
made to command all the others? What! Just because the sun
charts our days and years for us, does that mean to say it was
only made to stop us banging our heads against the walls?
No, no, if this visible god lights man’s way it is by accident, as
the King’s torch accidentally gives light to the passing streetporter.’

‘But,’ he said to me, ‘if, as you affirm, the fixed stars are so
many suns, one could conclude from this that the universe is
infinite, since it is likely that the peoples of one of these
worlds going round a fixed star can themselves observe other
fixed stars, farther above them, which we cannot make out
from here, and so on, to infinity.’

‘Without a doubt,’ I replied. ‘Just as God could make the
