of these purified souls, of which its own is the essence, that it
knows the secret of life, that it injects into the matter of your
worlds the power of generation, that it makes bodies capable
of feeling their existence and, finally, that it makes itself seen
and all things visible.

‘It remains for me now to explain to you why the souls of
the philosophers do not join the mass of the sun in essence,
like those of other men.

‘There are three classes of spirit in all the planets, that is to
say in all the small worlds which move round this one.

‘The coarsest of them serve simply to fill out the girth of the
sun. The more refined ones insinuate themselves into the
position of its rays. But those of the philosophers, which have
not contracted any impurity during their exile, arrive on the
sphere of daylight quite intact as new inhabitants of it. Unlike the others, they do not become component parts of its
mass, since the matter of which they are composed at the
moment of their conception is so nicely blended that henceforward nothing can decompose it (as with that which forms
gold, diamonds, and the stars, whose particles are linked together by so many embraces that the strongest solvent cannot
break their hold).

‘Now these philosophers’ souls are so much, in regard to
other souls, what gold, diamonds, and the stars are in regard
to other bodies, that the Epicurus in the sun is the same as the
Epicurus who once lived on earth.’

The pleasure I derived from listening to this great man
made the road seem shorter to me and I often quite deliberately broached abstruse and curious topics, asking him for his
ideas about them, in order to be instructed. Indeed I have
never seen kindness as great as his, for although he could have
reached the kingdom of the philosophers by himself in a very
few days, on account of the volatility of his substance, he preferred to weary himself for a long time with me, rather than
abandon me among the vast solitudes.

He was nevertheless in a hurry, for I recall that when I took
it into my head to ask him why he was returning before
