of fire down to you, just as a vapour situated in a different way
is disposed to produce a rainbow. I will instruct you no
further, for the Apple of Knowledge is not far from here; as
soon as you have eaten of it you will be as learned as I am. But
above all beware of taking the wrong one: the majority of the
fruits which hang upon this plant are covered with a rind
which, if you taste it, will cause you to sink lower than the
lowest man, while the inside will raise you to the level of the
angels.” ’

Elijah had reached this point with the instructions the
Seraph had given him when a little man came up to join us.
‘Here is that Enoch about whom I was telling you,’ my guide
told me in a low voice. As he spoke these words Enoch presented us with a basket filled with some unknown fruits, like
pomegranates, which he had just discovered in a secluded
grove the same day. I had crammed several of them into my
pockets as Elijah instructed me when Enoch asked him who I
was.

‘His adventure is one which deserves a longer conversation,’ replied my guide. “This evening when we have retired,
he will tell us himself the miraculous details of his voyage.’

As he finished speaking we found ourselves in a kind of
hermitage made of palm branches, ingeniously interwoven
with myrtles and orange trees. In a small nook I caught sight
of piles of a kind of gossamer so white and so fine that it could
have been taken for the very essence of snow. I also saw some
distaffs scattered here and there and asked my guide what
they were used for.

‘For spinning,’ he replied. ‘When the good Enoch wishes to
relax from his meditations he sometimes cards this tow, sometimes he spins thread from it and sometimes he weaves cloth
which is used to make shifts for the eleven thousand virgins.
At some time in your world you must have come across something white floating in the autumn air round about seed time:
the country people call it “Our Lady’s Cotton” and it is, in
fact, the flock which Enoch combs out from his flax when he
is carding it.’
