ahead, as I should be very glad (seeing I would be staying a
month there, as they had just agreed) to arrange for a number
of books to be brought over. They fell in with this and immediately after breakfast they put their arses into the saddle.
Meanwhile I, heaven help me, made a parcel of the volumes,
which I believed would not be in the library at Cussan, and
loaded it on to a mule. I set out at about three o’clock,
mounted on a good fast horse. I only went at walking pace,
however, in order to accompany my little library and to feast
my soul at greater leisure upon the delights of the scene. But
now I will tell you of an adventure which will surprise you.

After travelling more than four leagues, I found myself in
a country which I was convinced I had seen somewhere
before. Indeed I taxed my brain, wondering how I came to
know this landscape, until the objects in front of me
prompted my memory and I recalled that it was the very
place I had seen in my dream the previous night. ‘This bizarre
occurrence would have occupied my attention for longer
than it did, had it not been for a strange apparition, which
brought me back to my senses.

A spectre (at least I took it for such) presented itself to me
in the middle of the road and seized the bridle of my horse.
This phantom was of enormous stature and, to judge by the
little that could be seen of its eyes, it had an expression both
fierce and mournful. I could not, however, say if it was handsome or ugly, for it was covered from top to toe by a long robe,
which had been sewn together from the pages of a book of
plain-song, and its face was hidden by a card, on which the
In principio had been written.

The phantom then delivered his first words: ‘Satanus Diabolas!’ he cried out in terror, ‘I conjure you by the Great
Living God....’ At these words he faltered and continued to
repeat the Great Living God, while searching with a frightened expression for his priest to prompt him with the rest.
When he saw that, whichever way he looked, his priest was
nowhere to be seen, he was seized by such a dreadful trembling that his teeth chattered until half of them fell out, and
