I’m thinking that Big Macé’s house is up for sale with its
garden and its vine. I could get it easily for two hundred
francs, but it will take a week to strike a bargain and I should
like to beg you, my good sir, if it was your pleasure, not to let
your pistoles turn into oak leaves until Big Macé has them
well and truly counted and in his chest.’

The simplicity of the villain made me laugh. However, we
continued to walk towards the church until we reached it.
Some time later they began high mass there, but as soon as I
saw my guard getting up to take communion in his turn, I
measured the length of the nave in three strides and in as
many again I had swiftly lost myself in a deserted side-street.
Of all the various ideas racing through my mind at that
moment, the one I followed up was that of getting to
Toulouse, which was only half a league distant from that
town, intending to take the post-chaise from there.

I reached the suburbs in quite good time but I found myself
so ashamed to see everyone looking at me that it quite put me
out of countenance. Their astonishment proceeded from my
outfit, for as I was a complete novice in matters of beggary, I
had arranged the rags upon me in such a bizarre fashion that,
what with this and a gait which in no way suited my garb, I
appeared more like a man in fancy dress than a pauper. In the
end, reflecting that such universal attention threatened me
with dangerous consequences, I swallowed my shame. As soon
as I saw someone looking at me, I held out my hand to him. I
even begged charity of those who were not looking at me at
all. But you may marvel now at how, very often, by seeking to
be too ingenious in schemes where fortune wishes to play
some part, we ruin them by irritating this proud lady! I make
this reflection as a result of my own experience, for, seeing a
man with his back to me, dressed as a common citizen, I
dragged at his cloak and said to him: ‘Sir, if pity can touch...’

Before I could begin the next word the man had turned his
head. O gods! What an effect this had on him! But, O gods!
What an effect it had on myself! This man was my gaoler! We
were both astonished and aghast at seeing one another where
