ment and placed four little stones at the corners, as men do
who are stricken with the plague. I lay down beside it, my belly
against the earth and set up a melancholy whining in a
piteous voice. I had hardly taken up my station, when I began
to hear the mob shouting itself hoarse, long before I heard
the sound of their feet. I had still enough presence of mind,
however, to stay in the same position, in the hope of not being
recognized by them at all—and I was not disappointed. ‘They
all took me for a victim of the plague and passed very quickly,
stopping their noses, and most of them threw a coin on to my
handkerchief.

The storm thus dissipated, I ducked into an alley, put my
clothes on again and abandoned myself once more to fortune,
but I had apparently run so far that she was tired of following
me. One is compelled to believe that this was so, for after a
good deal of traversing squares, running the length of streets,
and cutting across them, this haughty goddess, unaccustomed
to travelling at such speed and the better to have done with
my wanderings, allowed me to fall blindly into the hands of
the constables who were pursuing me. On meeting me they
gave throat to a thunderous cry so enraged that it left me
completely deaf. ‘Thinking they had not enough arms to
arrest me with, they used their teeth as well. One dragged me
by the hair, another by the collar, while the more dispassionate of them were searching me. This search was better
fated than the one in prison: they found the rest of my gold.

While these charitable doctors were engaged in curing the
dropsy of my purse, a great uproar arose. The whole square
resounded with the words: ‘Kill! kill!’ and at the same time I
saw the flashing of swords. The gentlemen who were dragging
me along shouted that it was the Grand Provost’s constables
trying to rob them of their capture. ‘But beware of falling into
their hands,’ they said to me, pulling at me harder than ever,
‘for you will be condemned within twenty-four hours, and the
King will not save you.’

In the end, however, alarmed by the scuffle in which they
