The amazement its story had caused me made me curious
to follow it, and as it cut through the vastness of the heavens
with an unhurried flight, my eyes and my feet could keep pace
with it quite easily.

After about fifty leagues I found myself in a country so full
of birds that their number almost equalled that of the leaves
on the trees which held them. What surprised me even more
was that these birds, instead of being alarmed at my approach,
fluttered all round me. One twittered in my ear, another
strutted about on my head and, to be brief, after their little
antics had occupied my attention for a considerable time, I
suddenly felt my arms burdened with more than a million of
all kinds of species, which weighed so heavily upon me that I
could not move them.

They held me in this state until I saw four large eagles
arriving. Two of these gripped my legs with their talons and
the other two my arms and thus they lifted me high into the
air.

Among the crowd I noticed a magpie flying up and down
and hither and thither in great haste, and I heard it calling
out to me that I should not try to defend myself at all, since
its companions were already contemplating poking my eyes
out. This warning prevented any resistance I might have
made, and so these eagles carried me more than a thousand
leagues from there to a great wood, which was (so the magpie
told me) the town where their king had his residence.

The first thing they did was to throw me into prison in the
hollow trunk of a great oak tree, and a number of the sturdiest of them perched upon the branches, where they exercised the functions of a company of armed soldiers.

At the end of about twenty-four hours others came on
guard to relieve them. While I awaited whatever disasters
fortune was pleased to ordain for me in a state of deep melancholy, my charitable magpie kept me informed about everything that was going on.

Among other things, I remember it warned me that the
populace of the birds had protested loudly against my being
