rarefied than when it constitutes air, tries to transform into
itself by sympathy everything it encounters.

‘Thus the heat from coal, being the most refined form of
fire, and the best suited to penetrating a body, first slips
between the pores in our bodies and then makes us give off
sweat because we are being filled with a new substance. ‘This
sweat, dilated by the fire, is converted into vapour and becomes air; this air, still further diffused by the heat of the
reaction, or by the neighbouring bodies, is called fire, and the
earth, abandoned by the cold and humidity which bind all
the parts together, falls back to earth. Water, on the other
hand, although it only differs in substance from fire in that it
is more compact, does not burn us, because, being compact, it
seeks to make more compact by sympathy the bodies it encounters. The cold which we feel is nothing else but the effect
of our flesh drawing in upon itself, as a result of the proximity
of the earth or the water, which makes us imitate them. That
is why dropsical people convert all the food they consume
into water. That is why bilious people convert into bile all the
blood which their livers produce. Thus if we suppose that
there is one single element, it is most certain that all bodies,
each according to its nature, are equally attracted towards the
centre of the earth.

‘Now you will ask me why it is that iron, the metals, earth,
and wood fall towards this centre more quickly than a sponge
—if it is not because the latter is full of air, which naturally
tends upwards. Well that is not the reason at all, and here is
how I reply to you. Although a stone falls more quickly than
a feather, both have the same inclination towards their
journey. But if a cannon ball, for example, found the earth
pierced right through, it would hurtle to the centre more
swiftly than a bladder filled with air; and the reason is that
the mass of metal consists of a lot of earth forced into a small
space, while the air is a very small amount of earth occupying
a lot of space. All the particles of matter contained in the iron,
being fused together as they are, derive increased strength
from their unity. Having closed their ranks, they find they are
