two twins were found in Paris that had never had any but the
same illnesses and the same good health and married, without
knowing each other’s intentions, at the same time on the same
day. They wrote one another letters in which the sense, the
words, and the composition were the same and, finally, they
made up similar verses on the same subject, with the same
metaphors, the same turns of phrase, and the same sequence.
But do you not see that since the composition of the organs
of their bodies was similar, it was impossible for them not to
act in a similar manner, just as two identical instruments,
touched in the same way must give out identical harmonies?
And that if I make my body conform completely with yours
and become, in a manner of speaking, your twin, similar impulses of matter are bound to cause similar impulses of mind
in both of us?’

After that he began to imitate me again and continued
thus: “You are now greatly exercised over the origin of the
battle between these two monsters. I will teach you what it is.
You must know that the trees in the forest behind us were
unable to repulse the onslaught of the fire beast and have had
recourse to the ice animal.’

‘I have never before,’ I said, ‘heard tell of these creatures,
except from an oak tree here, who was in a great hurry
because he was only thinking of his own safety. I beg you,
therefore, to instruct me on the subject.’

This is how he spoke to me: ‘In this globe, where we are
now, you would see the woods very sparsely scattered indeed,
on account of the great numbers of fire beasts which ravage
them, were it not for the ice animals, which come every day,
at the behest of their friends, the forests, to cure the sick trees.
I say “cure,” for as soon as they have breathed upon the
glowing coals of this plague with their icy mouths they extinguish it.

‘In the world of the earth, where you come from, like myself, the fire beast is called salamander and the ice animal is
known by the name of remora or sucking-fish. Now you will
know that remoras live near the extremity of the North Pole
