indicates what the questioner is anxious to know, just like a
sundial. Now, in case you want to know why everyone in this
country has a large nose, learn that as soon as a woman is
brought to bed, the midwife takes the child to the Prior of the
Seminary and if at the end of the year when the experts are
assembled, its nose is found shorter than a certain measure
kept by the Syndic, it is declared snub-nosed and handed over
to people who castrate it. You will ask me the cause of this barbarousness and how it can be that we, among whom virginity
is a crime, should establish continence by force. But learn that
we do it after having observed for thirty centuries that a large
nose is the mark of a witty, courteous, affable, generous, and
liberal man and that a small one is a mark of the opposite.
That is why we make eunuchs of our snub-nosed babies,
because the Republic would rather have no children, than
any more like these.’

He was still speaking when I saw a completely naked man
coming in. I sat down at once and put my hat on, for these are
the marks of the greatest respect one can show anyone in that
country.

“The Realm,’ he said, ‘desires that before returning to your
world, you should notify the Magistrates, because a mathematician has just promised the Council that, provided when you
return home you are willing to construct a certain machine
according to his instructions, he will attract your globe and
join it to this one.’

I promised not to fail in this.

‘Now tell me, pray,’ I said to my young host when the other
man had gone, ‘why that ambassador carries pudenda made
of bronze at his belt.’ Indeed I had observed this a number of
times when I was in my cage, without daring to ask about it,
since I was always surrounded by the Queen’s ladies-inwaiting, whom I feared to offend if I had turned the conversation to so coarse a topic in their presence.

In reply to me he said: “The females here are not, any more
than the males, so ungrateful as to blush at the sight of that
which forged them, and virgins are not ashamed to admire
