to imagine himself to be an eagle with good sight in order to
restore them; for all our transformations come from movement.

“That is why, when we were transmuted from leaves,
flowers, and fruits into men, you saw us dancing for some
time afterwards, because we had not yet recovered from the
momentum which we had to give our matter, to turn ourselves into men. In this we are like bells, which, though they
have stopped ringing, still murmur for some time afterwards,
softly repeating the sound produced by the clapper when it
strikes them. It is also why you saw us dancing before making
this great man, because, in order to produce him, we had to
give ourselves all the general and specific movements necessary for his construction. Thus, as this motion gradually drew
our bodies together and absorbed them into one another,
each one of us, in each part of the whole, provided with his
own individual movement the particular movement it ought
to have. You men cannot do such things on account of the
heaviness of your substance and the frigidity of your imagination.’

He continued his exposition and supported it with
examples so familiar and so concrete, that I was eventually
disabused of a great number of the ill-proven opinions with
which our stubborn doctors of science blinker the feebleminded. I then began to understand how, in fact, the imagination of these solar peoples, being warmer, perforce, on
account of the climate, their bodies being lighter for the same
reason, and their personalities more volatile (since their world
exerts no central pull, as ours does, to wrench their bodies
away from the movements inspired by their imagination), I
conceived, I say, how this imagination, without the aid of any
miracle, could bring about all the ‘miracles’ it had just
performed.

I was ultimately convinced by a thousand examples of
almost comparable events, to which the peoples of our globe
give credence. Cippus, King of Italy, watched bulls fighting.
He had horns on the brain all night and next found his fore-
