common mentor fell silent because the meal was impatient to
take flight.

We stretched ourselves out upon very soft mattresses
covered with vast carpets. A young serving man took the elder
of our philosophers and led him into a separate little room.
My demon called out to him that he must come back and
join us as soon as he had eaten.

This whim of eating apart made me curious to ask the
reason for it. ‘He has no taste for the odour of meat,’ he told
me, ‘or even that of vegetables, unless they have died a natural
death, because he believes them capable of feeling pain.’

‘Iam not so surprised,’ I replied,‘ at his abstaining from flesh
and all things that have once been sentient beings, for in our
world the Pythagoreans and even some anchorite saints have
adopted this regimen. But not to dare to cut a cabbage, for
example, for fear of hurting it, seems to me totally ridiculous.’

‘And I,’ replied my demon, ‘find his opinion very plausible.

‘For tell me, is not this cabbage you mentioned just as much
one of God’s creatures as you? Are not God and necessity
equally father and mother to both of you? Has not God
throughout all eternity had His mind taken up with the
question of its birth just as much as with yours? He would
even appear to have provided more surely for that of the
vegetable than for that of the reasoner, since he has entrusted
the generation of a man to the caprices of his father, who can
beget him or not as he likes—a hazard to which He did not,
however, wish to subject the cabbage. Far from leaving the
fertilization of sons to the discretion of their father, He seems
to have feared the extinction of the race of cabbages more
than that of the human race. He makes them give birth to one
another willy nilly, unlike men, who only beget offspring
when the fancy takes them and cannot produce more than a
score at the most, while cabbages can produce four hundred
thousand per head.

‘To say that none the less God loves mankind more than
cabbages is simply tickling ourselves to make ourselves laugh.
Being incapable of passion, He can neither hate nor love any-
