4penetrate one another—and yet this matter must have been
drawn together and, if you like, abridged. The particles have
therefore occupied some space which was not occupied
before.

‘You may say it is incomprehensible that there should be
nothingness in the universe, that we should be partly composed of nothing. Well, why ever not? Is not the whole universe surrounded by nothingness? And since you grant me
this much, confess, then, that it is just as easy for the universe
to have nothingness within it as around it.

‘Now I am well aware that you are going to ask me why a
vessel of water bursts when the water freezes and contracts, if
it is not to prevent a vacuum being created. But my answer is
that it only happens because the air above it, which is drawn
towards the centre of the globe, just as much as earth and
water, encounters a vacant hostelry on its path through this
territory and goes in to lodge there. If it finds the portals of
this vessel—that is to say the channels leading to the pocket of
vacuum—too narrow, long and tortuous, it satisfies its impatience to reach its berth sooner by smashing it open.

‘But without amusing myself by replying to all these objections, I will venture to state that, if there were no vacuums,
there would be no movement, or else it would be necessary to
admit that bodies penetrate one another. For it would be
ridiculous to believe that when a fly pushes a parcel of air
aside with its wings, this parcel makes another recoil in front
of it, and this second one yet another, and that in this manner
the agitation of a flea’s little toe produces a hump on the other
side of the world!

‘When these people are hard pressed to explain this, they
have recourse to rarefaction. But when a body becomes rarefied how, in good faith, can one particle of its mass move
farther from another particle without leaving emptiness in
between them? Otherwise would not the two particles which
have just moved apart have to have occupied the same space
as a third one—and thus all three would have penetrated one
another? I expect you will ask me how, in that case, we can
