because at the given moment he was not in a position to be
able to resist the violence of his adversary.

‘“And if it is by good luck that our man brings his enemy to
the ground, why then it is fortune and not he who ought to be
crowned; he has contributed nothing. In short, the loser is no
more to blame than the dice thrower who sees his seventeen
points beaten by eighteen.”

“They admitted to him that he was right, but that it was not
humanly possible to regulate this, saying that it was better to
submit to a small inconvenience than to leave oneself exposed
to a hundred others of greater significance.’

This time she conversed with me no further, because she
was afraid of being found alone with me so early in the morning. It is not that immodesty is a crime in that country, on the
contrary, apart from convicted criminals, every man has the
right to possess every woman, and a woman, similarly, can
take a man to court if he refuses her. But she did not dare to
visit me often in public, she told me, because at the last sacrifice the priests had preached that it was chiefly women who
were spreading the story that I was a man, using this pretext
to conceal the abominable lust which consumed them to have
intercourse with the beasts and shamelessly to commit with
me sins against nature. This was the reason why I was left for
a long time without seeing her or any of her sex.

Someone must have stirred up the embers of the controversy about what I was, however, for just when I was
looking forward to nothing so much as dying in my cage, they
came and fetched me once more to give me a hearing. I was
questioned on several points of physics in the presence of a
large number of courtiers. My replies, I believe, gave no satisfaction, for the one who presided explained his opinions on
the structure of the universe to me at great length. They
seemed ingenious to me and if he had not passed on to its
origin, which he claimed was ‘eternal’, I would have found his
philosophy much more reasonable than ours. But as soon as I
heard him upholding a fantasy so contrary to what our faith
teaches us, I asked him what answer he had to the authority
