the gratifications of men, I am astonished that your priests
have not made it a crime for you to scratch yourselves, on
account of the agreeable pain you feel in doing it.

‘For all that, I have noticed that far-sighted Nature has
given all great men, the valiant and the clever, an inclination
towards the delights of love, as witness Samson, David, Hercules, Caesar, Hannibal, Charlemagne. Was it in order that
they might reap the organ of this pleasure from themselves
with a blow of a bill-hook? Alas, she even found a way under
a wash tub and debauched Diogenes, thin, ugly and lousy as
he was, and constrained him to heave sighs, reeking of carrots,
for Lais. Doubtless nature treated him in this way because she
feared there was a shortage of honest men in the world.

‘Let us conclude from all this that your father was compelled by his conscience to allow you to see the light of day,
and though he might think he had greatly obliged you by
making you, while gratifying himself, he has in essence given
you no more than an ordinary bull gives the cows ten times a
day for his own pleasure.’

‘You are wrong,’ my demon then broke in, ‘to want to regulate the wisdom of God. It is true that He has forbidden us the
excess of this pleasure, but how do you know He did not want
it this way, so that the difficulties we encounter in fighting this
passion might make us worthy of the glory He has in store for
us? Or how do you know His purpose was not to whet our
appetites? How do you know He did not foresee that if the
young were abandoned to the impulses of the flesh, overfrequent coition would weaken their seed and bring the
world to an end with the great-great-nephews of the first man?
How do you know He was not seeking to prevent the earth’s
fertility being exhausted by the needs of so many hungry
mouths? How do you know, lastly, if He did not wish to make
it appear quite unreasonable in order to reward just those
who had faith in His Word contrary to all semblance of
reason?’

This reply did not satisfy the young host, so far as I could
judge, for he wagged his head at it three or four times. But our
