were beginning to be involved, they abandoned me so completely that I was left all alone in the middle of the street,
while the aggressors were carrying out a butchery of all they
encountered. I will leave you to imagine whether I took
flight, having equal reason to fear both parties. In a little
while I got away from the brawl and I was already asking the
way to the Post, when a torrent of people in flight from the
fray disgorged into my street. Not being able to resist the
crowd, I went with it and, growing weary after running for
such a long time, in the end I reached a very dark little door,
through which I threw myself pell-mell with the other fugitives. We barred it behind ourselves and then, when everybody had got their breath back, one of the troop said: ‘Comrades, if you will take my advice, let us pass through the two
grilles and hold fast in the courtyard.’

These fearful words struck my ears with such a distressing
shock that I thought I should fall dead upon the spot. Alas,
all at once—but too late—I perceived that instead of escaping
to a place of safety, as I had believed, I had come and thrown
myself into prison, so impossible is it to escape the vigilance
of one’s star. I looked at this man more closely and recognized
him as one of the constables who had run after me for so long.
A cold sweat rose to my brow at this; I paled and began to feel
faint. The people who saw me so weak were moved with compassion and called for water. Everyone crowded round to help
me and by ill chance this accursed constable was one of the
first. As soon as he clapped eyes on me, he recognized me at
once. He made a sign to his companions and all together they
greeted me with one great: I arrest you in the King’s name!
Nothing further was needed to put me in prison.

I remained in the reception cell until the evening when,
one after the other, every turnkey came to trace my picture on
the canvas of his memory by making an exact dissection of
the parts of my face.

On the stroke of seven the sound of a bunch of keys gave
the signal for the retreat. I was asked if I desired to be con-

