in front of me—this little bit of a dwarf no bigger than my
thumb and yet powerful enough to have created itself—I was
awestruck.

‘Human animal,’ he said to me (in that original language
of which I have spoken to you already), ‘after observing you
for some time from up on the branch where I hung, I thought
I could read in your face that you were not a native of this
world. It is because of this that I have come down to be enlightened as to the truth of the matter.’

When I had satisfied his curiosity about all the subjects on
which he questioned me, I said to him: ‘But as for yourself,
reveal to me who you are. For what I have just witnessed is so
very astounding, that if you do not teach me I must despair of
ever knowing the cause of it. What do I see? An entire tree of
pure gold, whose leaves are emeralds, whose flowers are diamonds, whose buds are pearls and, amidst all this, fruits which
turn into men in the twinkling of an eye! I must confess that
to understand such a miracle is quite beyond my power.’

After this outburst I waited for his reply. “You can have no
objection,’ he said, ‘since I am the King of the whole nation
which makes up this tree, to my summoning it to follow my
example.’

When he had spoken these words I observed him withdraw
into himself. I do not know if, by winding up the internal
mechanism of his will, he set off some movement outside
himself which caused what you are about to hear of to
happen: but at all events, immediately afterwards all the
fruits, all the flowers, all the leaves, all the branches and
finally the whole tree disintegrated into little men that saw,
felt, and walked and, as if to celebrate their birthday at the
very moment of their birth, began to dance all round me.

Only the nightingale, amid all the rest of them, retained its
shape and was in no way transformed. It came and perched on
the shoulder of our little monarch, where it sang an air so
melancholy and so love-sick that the whole assembly, including the prince himself, was moved by the sweet langours and
dying falls of its voice, and wept several tears over it. I was
