my saliva moistened it when I was enveloped by universal
philosophy. It seemed to me that an infinite number of little
eyes plunged into my head and I knew how to speak to the
Lord.

‘When I have since reflected upon my miraculous ascent
here, I have readily believed that I could not have overcome
the vigilance of the seraphim which God has commanded to
guard this paradise, simply by means of the hidden virtues of
a natural body; but because He is pleased to make use of
secondary causes, I came to believe that He inspired me to
think of this means of entry, even as it was His will to use
Adam’s ribs to make him a wife, although He could have
made her out of clay just as well as him.

‘I spent a long time walking in the garden, but since the
Angel Doorkeeper of the place was my chief host, I had a
desire to greet him. My journey was accomplished in an
hour’s walking, for at the end of this time I arrived in a
country where the conjunction of a thousand flashes of lightning produced a brilliance so blinding that one could only see
darkness.

‘I had not properly recovered from this occurrence when I
beheld a handsome youth in front of me. “I am the Archangel
you are seeking,” he told me. “I have just read in God that He
suggested to you the means of coming here, where He desires
you to await His will.” He spoke to me about many subjects
and told me, among other things, that the light which
seemed to have alarmed me was nothing to be afraid of. It
could be seen almost every evening when he was making his
rounds, because, to avoid being surprised by the sorcerers who
enter invisibly everywhere, he was obliged to brandish his
flaming sword all round the earthly paradise and this brillior came from the flashes of lightning produced by his

ade.

‘“Those which you observe from your world,” he added,
“are caused by me. If you sometimes notice them from a long
way off, it is because the clouds in a distant clime are disposed
so as to receive their impression and reflect these faint images
