cupping glass. When my gaoler first threw me into this cave, I
said to him: ‘If you are giving me this stone garment for a suit,
it is too big, but if it is for a tomb, it is too tight. One can only
count the days here by nights and out of my five senses, I am
left with the use of but two, those of smell and touch: the one
to make me aware of the stenches of my prison and the other
to render it palpable to me. Indeed I confess I should believe
I were damned, if I did not know that no innocent people
enter hell.’

At the word ‘innocent’, my gaoler burst out laughing.
‘Why, upon my soul,’ he said, ‘then you are truly one of our
people? For I have never kept any but them under lock and
key!’

es other compliments of this nature, the good fellow
took the trouble to search me. I do not know what his intention was, but from the diligence which he employed I conjecture that it was for my own good. His researches were
fruitless, since I had slipped my gold into my hose during the
battle of Diabolas,and when, at the conclusion of a most exact
anatomy, he found himself as empty-handed as before, I
nearly died of fear, for he came near to dying of grief.

‘Ho! Damn it!’ he roared, foaming at the mouth, ‘I knew
he was a sorcerer the moment I set eyes on him! He isas skint
as the devil! Go to, go to, my friend,’ he continued. ‘Look to
your conscience in good time! ’

He had hardly finished these words when I heard the
jingling of a bunch of keys, from which he was selecting the
key to my cell. He had his back turned, which is why I drew
three pistoles dexterously from their hiding place, fearing
that he might take some revenge for the unhappiness of his
visit, and said to him: ‘Monsieur le Concierge, here is a
pistole. I beg you to have a morsel brought to me; I have not
eaten since eleven o’clock.’

He took it most graciously and protested to me that my misfortune touched him. When I perceived that his heart was
softened, I continued: ‘Here is another, in acknowledgement
of the trouble which I am ashamed to give you.’
