ment might dazzle the eyes of your reason. I will therefore
only describe these two young suns in their eclipse.

‘So it will be enough for you to know that one day the noble
Orestes, engaged in battle, was seeking out his dear friend
Pylades in order to enjoy the pleasure of either conquering or
dying at his side. Seeing him surrounded by a hundred arms
of steel which were raised against his head, alas, what did he
do? He hurled himself in desperation through a forest of
pikes, he shouted, he roared, he foamed at the mouth—but
how badly I express the horror of that inconsolable man’s
agitation! He pulled out his hair, he bit his hands, he tore at
his own wounds. But even now, at the end of this description,
I am forced to say that his way of expressing his grief died
with him. Then, when he thought to make a road with his
sword to go and help Pylades, a mountain of men stood in his
path. Nevertheless he cut through them and after treading
under foot for a long time the bloody trophies of his victory,
he gradually drew near to Pylades. But Pylades seemed to him
so near to death that he hardly dared to go on warding off the
enemy, for fear of surviving the man for whom he lived. To
see his eyes already filled with the shadows of death one would
have said that he was trying to poison his friend’s murderers
with his own looks. Finally Pylades fell lifeless to the ground
and his dear friend Orestes who, similarly, felt his own life
hovering on the brink of his lips, clung fast to it until he had
searched among the dead with a distracted gaze and found
Pylades once more. Then, pressing his mouth against his dead
friend’s, he seemed to wish to expel his own soul into his
friend’s body.

‘The younger of the two heroes died of grief upon the body
of his friend and you must know that from the decomposition
of their bodies which had doubtless impregnated the earth,
there were seen to arise among the already whitened bones of
their skeletons two young saplings, whose stems and branches,
all intertwined together, seemed in haste to grow only so that
they might become still further enlaced. It was recognized
that they had taken on a new form without losing the memory

