you right at the top of the great tower, whose battlements will
serve you as a balcony. Your eyes, at least, will be free
to wander, though your body holds them fast!’

‘Ah! my dear Dyrcona,’ cried the Count, taking up the
thread. ‘How unlucky we were not to have taken you with us
when we left Colignac! My heart gave me a presentiment of
something fearful by means of a blind feeling of grief, whose
cause was unknown to me. But no matter. I have friends. You
are innocent, and in any case I know very well how to die
honourably. A single thing dismays me. The ruffian on whom
I wanted to try the first blows of my revenge (you can easily
guess that I refer to my village priest) is no longer in a state
to feel them: the wretch has given up the ghost. I will tell you
the manner in which he died. He was running along with his
servant, trying to drive your mount into his stable, when the
horse, whose native sense was perhaps reinforced by faithfulness to its master, began to rear wildly, with such fury and to
such good effect that under three kicks this fool’s head caved
in and he vacated his benefice.

‘You probably do not understand the causes of this madman’s hatred, but I will acquaint you with them. You must
know, to tell you the whole story, that this holy man, a
Norman by race and a confidence trickster by profession, who
used to officiate at an abandoned chapel which was kept up by
money from the pilgrims, had designs upon the benefice of
Colignac. Despite all my efforts to maintain the possessor in
his rights, this droll fellow blarneyed his judges so successfully
that he ended up as our priest.

‘A year later he took me to court as well, on the grounds
that I should pay him a tithe. In vain it was demonstrated to
him that my land had been free from time immemorial: he
would not abandon his lawsuit, which he lost. But in the
course of the proceedings, he started so many side issues that
more than twenty fresh cases were spawned by the original
one, which will now remain on the shelf, thanks to your
horse’s hoof turning out to be tougher than Master Jean’s
brain.
