this feeling, but as I was stretching out my hand, I noticed
through the hole in the floor of my box that my tower was
already far away beneath me, and my little castle in the air,
thrusting upwards under my feet, gave me a momentary view
of Toulouse plunging downwards into the earth. This marvel
did not surprise me because of the suddenness of my flight,
but simply because of the frightening leap taken by the
human brain towards the achievement of a scheme, which
had alarmed me merely to imagine it. Nothing else astonished
me, for I had clearly foreseen that the vacuum created in the
icosahedron, when the rays of the sun were brought together
by the concave glasses, would attract a furious rush of air in
order to fill it, which would raise my box. Moreover, as I went
up, the fearful wind streaming through the hole could not
reach the roof without driving the machine upwards as it
forced its way violently through.

Although my plans had been considered with much care,
however, one circumstance did take me by surprise, because
I had not had sufficient faith in the effectiveness of my
mirrors. I had fixed a small sail outside my box, which could
easily be controlled by means of a string passing through the
bowl of the vessel, of which I held the other end. I had
imagined that in this way, when I was in the air, I could take
as much wind as I needed to reach Colignac. But in a twinkling the sun which was beating both directly and obliquely
upon the shining mirrors of the icosahedron, had hoisted me
so high that I lost Toulouse from view. This made me abandon my string, and a very short time later, through one of the
four windows which I had set in the sides of the machine, I
saw my little sail being snatched away and flying off at the
mercy of a whirlwind which had sucked it in.

I recall that in less than an hour I found myself above the
middle region of the air. I soon noticed this because I could
see it hailing and raining below me. I may perhaps be asked, ©
where this wind came from (without which my box could not
mount), at a level in the heavens which is exempt from
meteors. But provided you listen to me, I will answer this
