respect which fathers have for their children. I am well aware
that I have been more biased on the side of the children than
justice required, and that in favouring them I have gone a
little against my conscience. But I wanted to correct the
arrogance with which some fathers defy the weakness of their
little ones, and I was compelled to act like those who, in order
to straighten out a lopsided tree, pull at it from the other side,
so that between opposing tensions it grows straight and even.
In making fathers restore the deference which they had
tyrannically usurped, I have robbed them of much that was
theirs, so that next time they might be content with their due.
I know for certain that I will have shocked all old men with
this apology. But let them remember that they were children
before they were fathers and a good deal of what I have said
must also have been in their favour, since they were not found
under heads of cabbages themselves. Whatever happens in
the end, even if my adversaries were to make war on my
friends, I should be bound to win, for I have served the whole
of mankind well and only done disservice to half of them.’

With these words he fell silent and our host’s son took up
the conversation as follows: ‘Permit me,’ he said to my demon,
‘since, thanks to the trouble you have taken, I am acquainted
with the origin, history, customs, and philosophy of the world
of this little man, to add something to what you have said and
to show that children are in no way indebted to their fathers
for their birth, because their fathers were obliged by their
consciences to beget them.

“The very narrowest philosophy in their world admits that
it is better to die—since in order to die one must have lived—
than never to exist at all. Therefore since, if I do not give substance to this nonentity, I put it into a state worse than death;
in not bringing it into the world I am committing a worse
crime than killing it. Now if you had cut your son’s throat, O
my little man, you would consider yourself guilty of unforgivable parricide. It would indeed be monstrous, but it is even
more execrable not to give any existence at all to someone
who could have received it. For this child, whom you thus
