senses and the explanation of these mysteries. You men
imagine that what you cannot understand is either spiritual
or else does not exist, but this conclusion is quite false. ‘The
proof of this is the fact that there are perhaps a million things
in the universe which you would need a million quite
different organs to know. Myself, for example, I know from
my senses what attracts the loadstone to the pole, how the
tides pull the sea, and what becomes of an animal after its
death. Except by an act of faith, you men could no more
attain to such lofty conceptions—because you lack the senses
proportionate to these marvels—than a blind man could
imagine what makes up the beauty of a landscape, the colouring of a picture, or the nuances of the rainbow, unless
he imagined them as something palpable like food, as a
sound, or as a scent. In exactly the same way, if I sought to
explain to you what I perceive with the senses which you do
not possess, you would picture it to yourself as something
which can be heard, seen, touched, smelt or tasted, and it is, in
fact, none of these things.’

He had reached this point in his discourse when my
mountebank perceived that the company were beginning to
tire of my jargon, which they did not understand and took for
inarticulate grunting. He began pulling at my rope harder
than ever, so as to make me leap about, until the spectators
had debauched themselves with laughing and insisting that
I was almost as clever as the beasts in their country, and each
returned to his home.

Thus, the cruelty of the ill-treatment I received from my
master was alleviated by the visits which this obliging demon
paid me. For, as to conversing with those who came to see me,
apart from the fact that they took me for an animal well and
truly rooted in the category of the brutes, I did not know their
language and they did not understand mine and you can
judge now what similarity there was between the two. For you
must know that only two idioms are used in this country, one

which serves the great and the other which is peculiar to the
common people.
