hear these last words: ‘Sleep then! Sleep! I will leave you.
For the dreams one has here are so perfect that you will some
day be very glad to remember the one you are about to enjoy.
I shall amuse myself, however, by inspecting the curiosities of
the place and then I shall come and rejoin you.’

I think that is all he said—or else the fumes of sleep had
already put me in a state past hearing him.

I was in the middle of the most erudite and diverting dream
in the world when my philosopher came and woke me up. I
will tell it to you at a point where this will not break the
thread of my narrative, for it is very important for you to
know about it, so that you can understand how freely the
minds of the inhabitants of the sun operate, while sleep holds
their senses captive. I believe, myself, that this lake gives off
an air which has the property of entirely purifying the mind
of the encumbrance of the senses, for nothing enters your
thoughts which does not seem to perfect and instruct you.
This is what fills me with the greatest respect in the world for
those philosophers who are called ‘dreamers’ and are ridiculed by our ignoramuses.

So I opened my eyes with a start and seemed to hear him
saying: ‘Mortal! You have slept long enough! Get up if you
desire to see marvels such as could never be imagined in your
world. Since I left you about an hour ago, so as not to disturb
your slumbers, I have been walking continuously along the
banks of the five springs which flow out of the Lake of Sleep.
You can imagine with what attention I have observed them
all. They bear the names of the five senses and they flow very
close together.

‘Sight resembles a forked pipe filled with powdered diamonds and with little mirrors which receive and reflect the
image of all that presents itself to them. Its course flows round
the kingdom of the lynxes.

‘Hearing is equally double. It twists and turns like a labyrinth and one hears reverberating in the hollow depths of its
bed an echo of every sound which is heard near by. Unless I


