it cannot hope for any other. You are destroying the soul of a
cabbage when you make it die, whereas by killing a man you
merely make his soul change its abode.

‘I will go further: since God, the common Father of all
things, cherishes all His works equally, it would surely be
reasonable for Him to have shared His benefits equally
between us and the plants, so it is only just to consider them
as our equals. It is true that we were born first, but in God’s
family there is no right of seniority. Therefore if cabbages
were given no share in the fief of immortality along with us,
they were doubtless endowed with some other gift which
made up for its transience by its greatness. This may be a
universal intellect, a perfect understanding of the causes of all
things; and it may well be why the wise Mechanic did not
fashion them organs like ours—which only produce mere
reasoning, feeble and often misleading—but others, more
ingeniously formed, more powerful and numerous, which
serve them in conducting their speculative conversations.
Now you may ask me what they have ever communicated to
us of these great thoughts. But then what, pray, have the
angels ever taught you, any more than these? Just as there is
no correspondence, connexion, nor harmony between the
imbecile faculties of man and the ones of those divine beings,
so any attempt on the part of these intellectual cabbages to
make us grasp the occult causes of all the wonders of the world
would also be vain: we lack the senses capable of such lofty
perception.

‘Moses, the greatest of all philosophers, who drew his
understanding of nature from the source of nature itself,
pointed out this truth when he spoke of the Tree of Knowledge. He doubtless wanted to teach us, by means of this
enigma, that plants are in possession of the perfect philosophy, to the exclusion of ourselves. Remember then, O most
arrogant of all animals! that although the cabbage you cut
may not utter a word, it is thinking just the same. The unfortunate vegetable has no organs suited to yelling like you; it
has none for writhing, nor for weeping. But it has them, none
