trouble of making me the speech they had already made to
Cardano.

‘But’—I added—how can I resolve this doubt without
going the whole way up there?

‘And why not?’ I answered myself at once. ‘Prometheus
went to heaven long ago to steal fire there. Am I less bold than
he? And have I any reason not to hope for an equal success?’

After these outbursts, which may perhaps be called attacks
of delirium, came the hope that I might successfully accomplish so fine a voyage. In order to make an end of it, I shut
myself away in a comparatively isolated country house where,
having gratified my daydreams with some practical measures
appropriate to my design, this is how I offered myself up to
heaven.

I had fastened all about me a quantity of small bottles filled
with dew. The sun beat so violently upon them with its rays
that the heat which attracted them, just as it does the thickest
mists, raised me aloft until at length I found myself above the
middle region of the air. But the attraction made me rise too
rapidly and, instead of it bringing me nearer to the moon,
as I had supposed it would, this now seemed to me more
distant than at my departure. I therefore broke several of my
phials, until I felt that my weight was overcoming the attraction and that I was descending towards the earth again.

My supposition was correct, for I fell to earth some little
time afterwards and, reckoning from the hour at which I had
left, it should have been midnight. However, I perceived that
the sun was now at its zenith and that it was midday.

I leave you to picture my astonishment. It was very great
indeed, and not knowing how to explain this miracle, I was
insolent enough to imagine God had favoured my daring by
once more nailing thesun to the heavens inorder to illuminate
an enterprise of such grandeur. I was further astonished by
the fact that I completely failed to recognize the country
where I found myself. For it seemed to me that, having gone
straight up into the air, I should have come down in the place
I had left from. However, accoutred as I was, I made my way
