‘That is how we came to change our abode. Although you
heard us talking in a human language, that does not mean to
say that other trees express themselves in the same way. There
are none, apart from us oaks descended from the Forest of
Dodona, who speak like you. Other plants express themselves
in the following manner: you must have noticed the soft and
subtle breezes which are always rustling at the edge of woods;
these are the breath of their speech and this low murmuring
or delicate sound with which they break the sacred silence of
their solitude is, to be precise, their language. But although
the sounds of different forests may always seem identical, they
are nevertheless so various that each species of plant has its
own particular one. Thus the birch does not speak like the
maple, nor the beech like the cherry.

‘If the stupid people of your world heard me talking as Iam
now, they would believe that there was a devil imprisoned
under my bark. For, far from supposing that we can think,
they do not even imagine we have any feelings. Yet every day
they can observe how, at the first blow with which a woodcutter assaults a tree, the axe goes four times deeper into his
flesh than at the second. They ought to deduce from this that
the first blow must have surprised him and caught him off his
guard, since as soon as he was alerted by the pain, he roused
himself and summoned his forces to do battle and seemed to
turn himself to stone in order to resist the hardness of his
enemy’s weapons.

‘But I have no intention to try and make the blind see the
light. One individual is the same to me as the whole species
and the whole species is to me no more than one individual,
provided that individual is not contaminated with the errors
of the species. Therefore take heed, for, in speaking to you, I
consider I am speaking to the whole human race.

‘In the first place you must know that almost all the music
in the concerts given by the birds is composed in praise of
trees. But equally, in return for their diligence in celebrating
our fine actions, we take upon ourselves that of concealing
their love affairs. For do not imagine, when you have so much
