‘Since you are a philosopher,’ replied the woman, addressing Campanella, ‘I must unburden my heart to you before I
go any further.

‘To explain the matter that brings me here in a few words,
you must know that I am coming to complain of a murder
committed against the person of my youngest child. This barbarian, whom I have here, killed it twice over, although he
was its father.’

We were extremely puzzled by this speech and asked to
know what she meant by a child killed twice over.

‘You must know that in our country,’ the woman replied,
‘there is, among the other Statutes of Love, a law which regulates the number of embraces a husband may give his wife.
That is why every evening each doctor goes the rounds of all
the houses in his area, where, after examining the husbands
and wives, he will prescribe for them, according to their good
or bad health, so many conjunctions for the night. Well, my
husband had been put down for seven. However, angered by
some rather haughty remarks I had addressed to him as we
were getting ready to retire, he did not come near me all the
time we were in bed. But God, who avenges those who are
wronged, permitted this wretch to be titillated in a dream by
the recollection of the embraces he was unjustly denying me,
so that he let a man go to waste.

‘I told you his father had killed him twice over, because by
refusing to make him come into existence, he caused him not
to be, which was the first murder, but subsequently he caused
him never to be able to be, which was the second. A common
murderer knows that the man whose days he cuts short is no
more, but none of them could cause a man never to have been.
Our magistrates would have dealt with him as he deserved if
the cunning wretch had not excused himself by saying that he
would have fulfilled his conjugal duty, had he not been afraid
(as a result of embracing me in the height of the rage I had put
him in) to beget a choleric man.

‘The Senate was embarrassed by this defence and ordered
us to come and present ourselves to the philosophers and
