be content with this sample, since even if I knew the whole of
it, the brevity of our journey into its country, whither I am
returning it, would not allow me to pursue my story any
further.’

Having spoken thus, he leapt off my shoulder on to the
ground. He then joined hands with all his little people and
began to dance with them in a kind of figure, which I cannot
describe, for nothing comparable has ever been seen. But
hearken, peoples of the earth, to something I would not
oblige you to believe, since even in the world where what you
would call ‘miracles’ are but natural phenomena, what
follows passes for a miracle! As soon as these little men had
set themselves a-dancing, I seemed to feel their movements
in myself and mine in theirs. I could not watch this dance
without being perceptibly drawn from where I stood as if by
a vortex which was spinning with its own momentum. All the
parts of my body were agitated by che various movements of
each of theirs and I would feel the same joy spreading across
my face, which a similar action had caused to spread across
theirs.

As the dance became more intense, the dancers were
merged together with a stamping which grew much swifter
and more imperceptible. It seemed that the aim of the ballet
was to imitate an enormous giant, for as they drew nearer
together and redoubled the speed of their movements, they
blended so closely that all I could make out was a great luminous and half-transparent colossus, although my eyes could
still see them entering into one another.

It was at that time that I began to be unable to distinguish
one spinning creature from another on account of their rapid
rotations, and also because these rotations were continually
contracting as they approached the centre, and each vortex
finally occupied so little space that it escaped my sight. However, I assume that the parts continued to draw closer, since
this human mass, which had formerly been huge, gradually
shrank to form a young man of medium stature, whose every
limb was shaped with a symmetry, to which the greatest ideal
