his knowledge of current scientific and philosophical ideas,
talked well, and wrote his comedy, Le Pédant Joué, from
which Moliére was to borrow heavily for one of the most
famous scenes in Les Fourberies de Scapin (1671). He began
to write the literary letters later collected together as Lettres
Diverses, Lettres Satiriques and Lettres Amoureuses, €Xercises in elegance, wit, and invective. He may have travelled at
this time to England, Italy, and Poland, where some say he
observed experiments with a flying machine, a winged dragon
that beat its wings. In 1648 he first appeared in print with a
preface to one of Dassoucy’s poems.

About this time, Le Bret tells us, Cyrano refused the offered
patronage of the Maréchal de Gassion—because he wished to
remain a free man. He was for the moment somewhat less
impoverished, as a result of the death of his father, whom he
and his brother, Abel, are alleged to have robbed as he lay
dying. He now began to work on L’Autre Monde (literally,
“The Other World’). In 1648 there had been published a
French edition of Bishop Godwin’s The Man in the Moone,
the fanciful tale of one Domingo Gonsales, who was carried
to the moon on a machine borne by a number of large birds.
Once in the moon, he made a study of its utopian institutions.
The French edition is prefaced by the remarks: ‘If, reader,
you have ever seen either the True History of Lucian, or
‘Thomas More’s Utopia, or Chancellor Bacon’s New Atlantis,
I have no doubt that you will class with the same type of
writing this story, which is no less ingenious than diverting.’
Cyrano would know these books, as well as Campanella’s
rationalist utopia, The City of the Sun, and perhaps Kepler’s
fragmentary Somnium, a tale of a trip to the moon. This was
envisaged in quite realistic terms, with a light face and a dark
face to the moon, and a race of huge reptiles living there.
nae own book was to be broader in scope than any of
these.

In 1649 he ventured into print again with a ‘mazarinade’,
an unbridled attack on Mazarin in the manner of the burlesque poets like Scarron. The following year he changed
