‘At last,’ he added, ‘the people of your earth became so
stupid and gross that I and my companions lost all the
pleasure we had formerly taken in instructing them. You
cannot have failed to hear us spoken of, for they called us
Oracles, Nymphs, Genii, Fairies, Household Gods, Lemures,
Larvae, Lamias, Naiads, Incubi, Shades, Manes, Spectres,
and Phantoms. We abandoned your world during the reign
of Augustus, shortly after I had appeared to Drusus, son of
Livia, who was invading Germany and had forbidden him to
go any further.

‘I have recently returned from there for the second time, for
a hundred years ago I was commissioned to make another
journey there. I travelled about Europe a great deal and conversed with people you may possibly have known. Among
others, I appeared to Girolamo Cardano,’ one day as he was
studying; I taught him a number of things and in recompense
he promised me that he would bear witness to posterity from
whom he learned the miracles he intended to set down. I saw
Doctor Agrippa de Nettesheim,? Abbot Johannes of ‘Trittenheim,’ Doctor Faustus,t La Brosse,> and César de Nostradamus® there and a certain cabal of young men, known
to the common herd under the name of “‘Rosicrucians’,
whom I instructed in a number of sleights of hand and secrets

*Cardano claimed that much of his work was dictated by a
familiar demon from Venus.

* Henri-Corneille Agrippa de Nettesheim (1486-1535), doctor
and occult philosopher, reputed to have a black dog as a familiar.

* 1462-1516: as Abbot at Spanheim his erudition and study of
magical practices earned him a reputation as a sorcerer.

_ *Sorcerer and charlatan, already a legendary figure in Germany
in his own lifetime (c.1480-c.15,40). His familiar spirit was Mephistopheles.

* A man of this name was hanged as a sorcerer under Louis XIII.
But Guy de La Brosse was a doctor, natural scientist,and bohemian
of the early seventeenth century who followed a kind of pagan cult
of nature.

* Early seventeenth century adventurer who claimed to have a
familiar spirit called Sophocles.
