palace which occupies almost a whole district of the city. The
girls do not enter it until they are thirteen. Everyone undergoes a year of probation there, during which the boys devote
themselves entirely to winning the affection of the girls and
the girls to making themselves worthy of the friendship of the
boys. When twelve months have expired, the Faculty of Medicine goes in a body to visit this amatory training college.
It examines them all, one after the other, down to the most
private parts of their persons, makes them copulate in its
presence and then, according to how vigorous and well-built
the male proves to be at this test, he is given ten, twenty,
thirty, or forty girls as wives, from among those who are fond
of him, provided that their love is reciprocal. However, the
husband may only sleep with two at a time and he is not
permitted to embrace any of them while she is pregnant. The
girls that are judged sterile are only employed as servants and
from the impotent men are recruited the slaves, who are
allowed carnal intercourse with the barren women. In addition to this, when a family contains more children than it can
feed, the State adopts them. But this is a misfortune which
rarely occurs, for as soon as a woman gives birth in the city,
the exchequer provides an annual allowance for the education of the child, according to its quality, which the State
Treasurers themselves bring round to the father’s house on a
certain day of the year. But if you want to know more, come
into our basket; it is large enough for four. Since we are all
going in the same direction, we can while away the long
journey with conversation.’

Campanella was of the opinion that we should accept the
offer and I was equally delighted to avoid the fatigue. When I
came to help them raise the anchor, I was quite astonished to
see that instead of a thick cable to carry it, it was simply hung
from a silken thread as fine as a hair. I asked Campanella how
it could happen that a heavy mass like this anchor did not
cause something so frail to snap under its weight. The good
man replied to me that this cord did not snap because it had
been spun so evenly throughout that there was no reason why
