bly, as was done. There I was treated as severly as it is possible to imagine. The examiners questioned me, among other
things, on the subject of philosophy. I explained to them, in
complete good faith, what my tutor had once taught me about
it, but they had little trouble in refuting what I said with
many likely and convincing arguments. Finding myself
totally defeated in debate, I cited the principles of Aristotle
as a last resort, but these served me no better than sophisms,
for they revealed the falseness of them to me in a couple of
words.

“This Aristotle,’ they told me, ‘whose science you make so
much of, doubtless made his principles fit his philosophy, instead of fitting his philosophy to basic principles. But even
then he was under an obligation to prove they were at least
more reasonable than those of the other sects, which he could
not do. And that is why the good Lord will not find fault with
us if we bid him adieu.’

When they finally saw that all I could jabber was that they
were no more learned than Aristotle and that I had been forbidden to argue with anyone who denied his principles, they
all unanimously concluded that I was not a man but possibly
some type of ostrich, seeing that like these birds I carried my
head erect, walked upon two legs, and indeed, apart from a
trifling amount of down, wholly resembled them. They therefore ordered the fowler to take me back to my cage.

I spent my time there pleasantly enough, for now I had
mastered their language correctly, all the Court delighted to
make me chatter. Among others, the Queen’s ladies-inwaiting would always thrust some titbit into my basket. ‘The
most good-natured of them all conceived some fondness for
me and she was so transported with joy when I revealed to her
in secret the mysteries of our religion, particularly when I
told her about our bells and our holy relics, that she protested
to me with tears in her eyes that if ever I found myself in a
position to fly back to our world, she would follow me with
all her heart.

Early one morning I woke up with a start to see her beating

