was going to tell him about it in detail. But I was just opening
my mouth when, round the corner of a hedge which ran to
meet our path, we caught sight of Colignac, walking along
with great strides.

As soon as he saw us he called out from where he was: “You
see a man who has just escaped from the most terrible visions
—a spectacle enough to turn my wits! I scarcely gave myself
time to put on my doublet before coming down to tell you
about it, but you were neither of you in your rooms any more.
That is why I ran into the garden, suspecting that you must
be out here.’

The unfortunate gentleman was, in fact, almost completely
out of breath. As soon as he had recovered, we urged him to
unburden himself. For such things, though they may often
be extremely trivial, can nevertheless be very oppressive.

“That is my intention,’ he replied. ‘But first let us be seated.’

An arbour of jasmine conveniently offered us seats in the
cool. We withdrew there and when we had each made ourselves comfortable, Colignac continued thus: ‘You must know
that I dozed off two or three times during the night and each
time found myself in a considerable predicament. Then, in
the nap I took during the twilight before dawn, I dreamed
that my dear guest here was between the Marquis and myself
and that we were holding him in a tight embrace, when a
great black monster, consisting of nothing but heads, suddenly came and snatched him away. I think it was even going
to throw him into a lighted bonfire near by, for it was already
holding him over the flames, but a girl resembling the muse
known as Euterpe threw herself at the knees of a lady, begging
her to save him (this lady had the bearing and characteristics
which our painters employ to represent nature). Hardly had
she heard the prayers of her handmaiden when she cried out
in amazement: “Alas! he is one of my friends! ”

‘At once she put a kind of blow-pipe to her lips and blew
through the tube so hard under my dear guest’s feet that she
made him rise up to heaven and saved him from the savagery
of the monster with a hundred heads. I seem to have called
