is almost completely solid and bound together by angular
particles, it consumes what is thrown on to it in an instant.
All these observations are so familiar that it will come as no
surprise that I should draw near to the sun without being
burnt. For what burns is not fire, but the matter to which it
is attached, and the fire of the sun cannot be combined with
any other matter.

After all, do we not experience how joy (which isa fire that
merely causes the circulation of an airy mixture of blood,
whose greatly rarefied particles brush softly against the membranes of our flesh) titillates and arouses an indefinable
blind voluptuousness? This pleasure, or let me rather call it
this first step on the way to pain, does not go as far as to
threaten the body with death but only to make us feel a desire
which causes our spirit an emotion, which we call ‘joy’. That
is not to say that fever, although it has quite contrary effects,
is not a fire just as much as joy. But it is a fire combined with
a substance, whose particles have horns. Such is the black bile
or melancholy, which goes thrusting its crooked points
wherever its mobile nature sends it, piercing, cutting, and
lashing, and by means of this agitation produces what is
called ‘fever heat’.

But this string of proofs is quite unnecessary. The most
everyday experiences are quite sufficient to convince the obdurate, and I have no time to lose. I must think of myself. Iam
still following Phaeton’s example, in the midst of a chariot
race which I cannot abandon and in which, if I make one false
move, all nature together cannot save me.

I was able to recognize very distinctly that, as I had previously suspected, on my way up to the moon, it is indeed the
earth which revolves about the sun from east to west and not
the other way round. For after France I saw the foot of the
boot of Italy, then the Mediterranean Sea, then Greece, then
the Bosphorus, the Black Sea, Persia, the Indies, China, and
finally Japan, passing opposite the hole in my box, one after
the other: and some hours after my take-off, the whole of the
