of what they had been. For their scented buds leaned over one
another and warmed one another with their breath, as if to
make one another blossom more swiftly. And what shall I
say of the loving exchanges which sustained their life together? Never did the sap, in which their nourishment
resides, offer itself to their roots without their sharing it
ceremoniously. Never was one of them undernourished without the other being weak for want of food. The two of them
drank together at their nurse’s breasts from within, just as
you suck at them from without.

‘At length these happy friends produced apples—but miraculous apples, which performed even more miracles than
their fathers. No sooner had you eaten apples from the
one tree than you became hopelessly in love with whoever
had eaten the fruit of the other. And this occurrence took
place almost every day, because all the offshoots of Pylades
were always to be found near those of Orestes and vice versa.
Their fruits were almost twins and could not bear to be
parted.

‘Nature had, however, defined the energy of their double
essence with such care that when the fruit of one of the trees
was eaten by another man, this engendered a mutual friendship. When the same thing occurred to two people of different
sexes it gave rise to love, but to a vigorous love which always
retained the character of its origin, for although the fruit
made its effect proportionate to their strength, softening its
virtue in the case of a woman, yet it still retained a certain
quality of maleness.

‘It should also be noted that the one of the pair who had
eaten the most was the one most loved. This fruit took good
care to be both very sweet and very beautiful, since there is
nothing as beautiful and as sweet as friendship. Thus it was
these two qualities of beauty and goodness, which are rarely
met with in the same object, which brought this fruit into
fashion. Oh, how many times over, thanks to its miraculous
virtue, were the examples of Pylades and Orestes repeated!
Since that time we have seen many a Hercules and Theseus,


