two-thirds of the musical scales which covered him came off
in shreds. He turned back towards me, however, and with a
look which was neither mild nor fierce, but in which I could
see his spirit wavering and, trying to resolve whether it was
more appropriate to grow angry or to soften, he said: ‘So ho,
Satanus Diabolas! God’s blood! I conjure you, in the name
of God and of my Lord St. John, to let me get on with it. For if
you budge nor foot nor paw, the devil take it, I'll rip your
guts out!’

I tried to jerk the bridle of my horse free from his grip, but
I was choking with fits of laughter, which took away all my
strength. Added to that, some fifty villagers came out from
behind a hedge, crawling on their knees and making themselves hoarse with singing the Kyrie Eleison. When they were
quite near, four of the most robust of them grasped me by the
collar, after first dipping their hands in a basin of holy water,
which the servant from the presbytery was holding for that
purpose. As soon as I had been seized, Master Jean appeared,
devoutly removed his stole and garrotted me with it. Next a
mob of women and children arrived and, despite all my
struggles, they stitched me into a sheet. I was, indeed, so well
wrapped up in it that only my head could be seen, and in this
outfit they took me off to Toulouse, as if they were carrying
me to the family vault.

One man would shout that if they had not done this there
would have been a famine, because when they met me I was
going out to cast a spell on the crops as sure as anything. Then
I would hear another moaning that the sheep-pox had only
broken out in his flock after I had struck him on the shoulder
one Sunday, coming out of Vespers. But what made me feel
some inclination to laugh, despite all the mishaps that had
befallen me, was a young peasant girl calling in terror after
her betrothed, alias the phantom, who had taken my horse
from me (for you must know that the clown had mounted
astride it and was already spurring it on in good earnest, as if
it were his own).

‘You wretch!’ screeched his beloved. ‘Have you only one
