‘But where the devil is the soup?’ I answered him, almost
in a rage. ‘Have you made a wager to tease me for the whole of
today?’

‘I thought,’ he replied, ‘that in the town you have come
from you would have seen your master or somebody else
taking his meals. That is why I did not tell you the way they
feed themselves here. But since you are still ignorant of this,
you must know that here they live solely upon vapours. Their
culinary art consists in enclosing in great vessels, especially
moulded for the purpose, the exhalation which comes off
meats when they are cooking. When several of various kinds
and different flavours have been collected, they uncork the
vessel in which a particular odour has been gathered to suit
the appetites of those who are being served. After that they
uncover a second and so on until the company is satisfied.
Unless you have already lived in this way you would never
believe that the nose, without assistance from the teeth or the
gullet, could do the mouth’s job in feeding a man, but I
should like to show you by experience that this is so.’

As soon as I had finished speaking, I felt so many agreeable
and nourishing vapours entering the room in succession that,
in less than ten minutes, I felt myself completely gorged.
When we had risen he said: “This is not something which
should cause you much surprise, since you cannot have lived
so long without observing that in your world cooks, pastrycooks, and roasters, who eat less than people from any other
walk of life, are nonetheless much fatter. Where do you think
their corpulence comes from, if not from the vapour in which
they are incessantly enveloped and which penetrates and
nourishes their bodies? In this way the people in this world
enjoy much more constant and vigorous good health, because
their food produces hardly any excrement, which is the origin
of almost all diseases. You were possibly surprised at being
undressed before the meal, as this custom is not observed in
your country, but here it is the fashion and they follow it so
that the body should be more accessible to the vapour.’

‘Sir,’ I returned, ‘what you say is highly probable and I have
