intellectual operations of our flies and—though you cannot
think for yourself—you will at least share in the glory of
helping them to think!’

At about this stage in the homily we arrived at the place
appointed for my punishment.

There were four trees of the same height very close together
and almost equidistant, and on top of each of them a tall
heron was perched. I was brought down from my seat on the
black ostrich and a number of cormorants lifted me up to
where the four herons were waiting for me. These birds,
facing one another, each one firmly supported by its tree,
wound their necks (which were of a prodigious length) about
me like ropes, two round my arms and two round my legs.
They bound me so tightly that although each of my limbs was
only held fast by a single one of their necks, I was quite powerless to move a muscle.

They were due to remain in this position for a long time,
for I heard the cormorants which had lifted me being ordered
to go and catch some fish to stuff into the herons’ beaks.

We were still waiting for the flies, because they had not cleft
the air with a flight as powerful as ours. But it was not long
before we heard them.

The first thing they did was to divide up my body between
them, and this distribution was so cunningly arranged that
my eyes were allotted to the bees, so that they should sting
them as they ate them; my ears to the bumble bees, so that
they should deafen and devour them at the same time; my
shoulders to the fleas, so that they should nibble into them
with bites that would make me itch; and so on with the rest.
It was as if all the atoms of which the air is composed had
turned into flies, for I was barely touched by two or three rays
of light—which would seem to have donned a disguise in
order to make their way through to me—so tightly packed
and close to my flesh were these battalions.

But just as each one of them was already choosing the spot
it fancied to bite, I suddenly saw them fall back abruptly and
amidst the confusion of countless thunderclaps, which re-
