him, and to rescue from the throng of the animals a spirit
capable of the vision of God. Lastly I urged him seriously to
consider the prospect of one day seeing his immortality spent
in a state of bliss rather than one of pain.

‘What!’ he answered with a shout of laughter, ‘do you hold
your soul to be immortal to the exclusion of the beasts? ‘To be
frank with you, my dear friend, you have a most insolent
pride. From whence, pray, do you deduce this immortality at
the expense of the beasts? Might it be because we are gifted
with reason and they are not? In the first place I deny this and
I will prove to you, any time you please, that they can think
just like us. But even if it were true and reason had been
handed out to us as a prerogative, a privilege reserved solely
for our species, would this mean that God must enrich man
with immortality because He had already lavished reason
upon him? Then, by that reckoning, I must give this pauper
a pistole today because I gave him a crown yesterday? You can
see for yourself the fallacy in this logic and that, on the contrary, if Iam just, instead of giving this man a pistole, I should
give the next man a crown, because he has had nothing from
me. And from that one must conclude, O my dear companion,
that God, being yet a thousand times more just than us, would
not have given everything to some and left nothing for the
others. You may cite the example of the elder sons in your
world who carry off almost all the goods in the house as their
patrimony. This, however, is a weakness on the part of their
fathers, who want to perpetuate their name and are afraid of
it being ruined or lost through poverty. But God, who is incapable of errors, would certainly take good care not to
commit such a great one, and besides, since there is neither a
before nor an after in God’s eternity, in His sight juniors are
no younger than seniors.’

I will not conceal the fact that these arguments shook me.

‘If you will allow me,’ I said, ‘I will drop this subject,
because I do not feel confident enough to answer you. I am

going to our common mentor to seek the solution to the
difficulty.’
