the other creatures in more distant spheres. And since even in
your world there used to be prophets, whose spirits, heated by
a strong passion, had presentiments about the future, so in
this one, which is much nearer the sun, and in consequence
more luminous than yours, it is not impossible for some odour
of the past to reach a powerful genius and for his mobile
mind to travel backwards as well as forwards and be capable
of arriving at the cause via the effects, seeing that it can
deduce the effects from the cause.’

He completed his recital in this manner, but after a still
more detailed lecture, in which he revealed to me some deeply
hidden mysteries, some of which I wish to keep secret and the
rest of which have escaped my memory, he told me that it was
less than three weeks since a mound of earth, made pregnant
by the sun, had given birth to him.

‘Take a look at this tumour!’ He drew my attention to a
mysterious swelling in the mud, like a molehill. ‘It is,’ he said,
‘a pimple, or let me rather call it a womb, in which the embryo of one of my brothers has been hidden for nine months.
I am waiting here with the intention of offering him my services as a midwife.’

He would have continued, had he not noticed the earth
quivering at the edge of this lump of clay. From this and the
bigness of the bubo, he judged that the earth was already in
labour and that the palpitation was caused by the strain of
the birth pangs. He left me at once to run over to it, while I
went off to retrieve my cabin.

I climbed back up the mountain down which I had come
and reached the summit in a state of considerable weariness.
You can imagine how distressed I was to find that my machine
was no longer where I had left it. I had begun to lament its
loss when I perceived it flitting along, a great distance away.
I ran to it as fast as my legs could carry me, making myself
quite out of breath. It was certainly a comical sport for anyone to contemplate, this new style of hunting, for sometimes
when I almost had my hand upon it, the bowl of glass would
undergo a slight rise in temperature. This would draw up the
