the sea, whose salt still bears witness to the fact that it must
be a collection of sweat, for all sweat is salty.

‘After the waters had subsided, the earth was left covered
with rich, fertile mud. When the sun shone on this, a kind of
blister arose, containing a seed which could not germinate on
account of the cold. It then received another coction, which
improved and perfected the mixture more precisely and produced an embryo which was not only able to vegetate but also
capable of feeling. But because the waters (which had stagnated for so long on top of the slime) had chilled it too much,
this pimple did not burst. So the sun baked it once more, and
after a third coction this womb was heated up so much that
the cold no longer impeded its delivery. It opened and gave
birth to a man, who retained in his liver (which is the seat of
the vegetative soul and the place of the first coction) the
power of growth; in his heart (which is the seat of action and
the place of the second coction) the power of movement; and
in the brain (which is the seat of the intellect and the place of
the third coction) the power to think. Otherwise why should
we be longer in our mothers’ bellies than all the rest of the
animals, if not because our embryo needs three separate
coctions to form the three separate faculties of our soul and
those of the beasts only two to form their two powers?

‘I am well aware that the horse is only completed within
ten, twelve, or fourteen months in the belly of the mare. But it
has a constitution so opposed to that which makes us men
that it never begins its life (note this! ) except in the months
which are quite antipathetic to our own, when we remain in
the womb—defying the natural course of things. Thus it is no
wonder that the period of time nature needs to deliver a mare
should be different from one taken to bring a woman to bed
with child.

‘“Yes, but all the same,” I can hear someone saying, “the
horse remains in its mother’s belly longer than us and consequently it receives there more perfect or more numerous
coctions! ”

‘I reply that this does not follow. I do not seek support from
