a moment—before your arrival, an angel appeared to me and
promised me to make the justice of my cause known, provided I go and have a mass said to Our Lady of this town at
the High Altar tomorrow. I tried to excuse myself on the
ground that I was too closely locked up, but he replied that a
man would come, sent by the gaoler to keep me company,
whom I would simply have to instruct in his part of leading
me to the church and bringing me back to prison. I should
recommend him to secrecy and unquestioning obedience on
pain of dying within the space of one year, and if he should
doubt my word I should tell him as a sign that he is a Brother
of the Scapular Confraternity.’ (For the reader must know
that beforehand I had glimpsed a scapular through a slit in
his shirt which suggested the whole invention of this apparition to me.)

“Why, yes, to be sure, my good lord,’ he said, ‘I will do what
the angel has commanded us. But it must be at nine o’clock
then, because at that time our master will be in Toulouse for
the betrothal of his son to the daughter of the public executioner. Lord save us, a hangman has just as good a name as a
sheep tick! ‘They say she will have as many crowns from her
father when she marries as you need for a king’s ransom. As
you see, she is rich and pretty, but such things take care not to
happen to a poor fellow. Alas! my good sir, you see...’ At
this point I interrupted hastily, for, from the beginning of his
digression, I anticipated a long string of red herrings.

After we had well and truly digested our plot, the oaf took
leave of me. The next day he did not fail to come and exhume
me, sharp on the promised hour. I left my clothes at the prison
and fitted myself out with some rags, as we had agreed I
should the night before, in order to avoid being recognized.
As soon as we were in the open I did not forget to count him
out his twenty pistoles. He looked at them hard, with very
wide eyes. |

‘They are gold and fully up to weight,’ I told him, ‘I give
you my word.’

‘Hey, no sir,’ he replied to me, ‘I’m not thinking of that.
