off, with an express command to make us sleep together, the
Spaniard and myself, so that our species should multiply
within his realm. The will of the Prince was executed in all
particulars, and I was very glad of this because of the pleasure
I derived from having someone to talk to during the solitude
of my brutification.

One day my male (for they took me to be the female of his
species) told me that what had really driven him to flee across
the face of the earth and finally to abandon it for the moon,
was the fact that he had not been able to find a single country
where even the imagination was at liberty. ‘You see,’ he told
me, ‘unless you wear a hood, whatever fine things you may
say, if they are against the principles of the doctors of the
cloth, you are an idiot, a madman, and something worse
besides. They wanted to bring me before the Inquisition in
my country because I told the pedants to their beards that
there are vacuums in nature and that I knew of no substance
in the world heavier than any other.’

I asked him what evidence he had to support an opinion
which was so little accepted.

‘In order to prove the point,’ he replied, ‘one must suppose
that there is only one element; for although we may see water,
earth, air, and fire in separation from one another, they can
never be found in so completely pure a state that they are not
still combined together. For example, fire, when you examine
it, is not fire, but merely air greatly distended; air is only
water greatly dilated; water is only molten earth, and earth
itself is nothing else but water greatly contracted. From a
serious investigation of matter, therefore, you would discover
that it is all one, but that, like an excellent actor, it plays all
kinds of roles in this life, in all kinds of disguises. Otherwise
you would be forced to admit that there are as many elements
as there are kinds of body. And if you ask me why fire burns
and water cools, seeing that it is all merely a single substance,
I reply to you that this substance behaves sympathetically
according to the situation in which it finds itself at the time
of its activity. Fire, which is nothing but earth even more
