‘This is all I can conjecture about our pastor’s caprices. But
you may marvel at the prudence with which he pursued his
madness! I have just been assured that, having got the unhappy scheme for your imprisonment into his head, he had
secretly exchanged the benefice of Colignac for another in his
own country, to which he intended to retire as soon as you
were captured. His servant has even said that he had heard
him muttering, on seeing your horse near his stable, that there
was something to take him to a place where he would be out
of reach.’

After telling me this, Colignac warned me to be wary of any
offers or visits which a very powerful person, whom he named,
might make me, for it was through this man’s credit that
Master Jean had won his case over the claim. This person of
quality had intervened in the affair on his behalf, in return
for services rendered to his son at college by the good priest
who was at that time a sizar.

‘And since it is very hard,’ Colignac continued, ‘to be involved in litigation without bitterness, and without retaining
in one’s soul a trace of enmity which is never effaced, although
we have been reconciled, he has always secretly sought occasions to cross me. But it does not matter: I have more connections than him in the courts and I have many friends, or in
the last resort we can arrange for the intervention of the royal
authority.’

After Colignac had said this, they both tried to console me,
but these evidences of such a solicitous grief only served to
increase my own.

Meanwhile my gaoler had returned to find us and tell us
that the room was ready. ‘Let us go and see it,’ replied Cussan,
starting off, and we followed him.

I found it very well furnished. ‘I lack nothing,’ I told them,
‘but books.’ Colignac promised to send me all those I listed
for him the following day.

When we had taken a good look and had fully appreciated
from the height of my tower the moats with sheer sides, which
surrounded it, and from all the arrangements of my apart-
