other things there, but with my flying I had been tossing
about, which brought me so near to the edge of the bed that
I fell on to the floor beside it, with my belly completely bare
on the plaster and my eyes wide open.

‘That, gentlemen, is the whole extent of my dream, which I
consider to be nothing more than a pure effect of those two
qualities which predominate in my temperament. For
although this one differs a little from those which I always
have, in that I flew up into the heavens without falling back,
I attribute this change to my blood, which has circulated more
generously than usual, thanks to my enjoyment of yesterday’s
pleasures, and penetrated the melancholy, buoying it up and
relieving it of that heaviness which used to make me fall back
to earth. But the science of dreams is, after all, one which
depends largely on guesswork.’

‘In faith,’ Cussan took up, ‘you are right. They are a hotchpotch of everything we have been thinking about when we
were awake, a monstrous chimera, an assembly of confused
elements, which our fancy—no longer guided by our reason
when we are asleep—presents to us in complete disorder. Yet,
none the less, we believe that, by twisting them about, we can
squeeze the true sense out of them and extract knowledge of
the future from dreams, as we can from oracles. For my part,
I have never found any other similarity between the two,
unless it be that dreams and oracles are both incomprehensible.

‘At any rate you can judge the value of all the others from
mine, which was in no way extraordinary. I dreamed that I
was very sad and that I kept meeting Dyrcona everywhere
calling out to us. But without further racking my brains to
find an explanation of the dark enigmas, I will discover their
mystical import to you ina couple of words. And this, by God,
is that at Colignac we have very bad dreams, and if you agree
with me we will go and try to have better ones at Cussan.’

‘Very well, let us go there,’ the Count said to me, ‘since this
spoil-sport is so keen to do so.’

We agreed to leave the same day. I begged them to go
