broadest of four great rivers, which flow together to form a
lake, before the invisible essence of the herbs which exhale
their fragrance over this country came to delight my nostrils
and I discovered that the stones were neither hard nor uneven
and that they were careful to soften themselves when one
walked on them. I came first to a cross-roads where five
avenues met, in which the trees were so exceedingly tall that
they seemed to be holding a garden of foliage aloft in the sky.
As I lifted my eyes from the roots to the topmost branches and
let them fall from the summit to the foot, I began to wonder
whether the ground supported them or if they did not themselves carry the ground suspended from their roots. Their
crowns, proudly aloft, also seemed as if they were bowed down
under the weight of the celestial spheres, so that one would
think they sustained their load only with groaning limbs.
Their boughs, uplifted to embrace heaven, showed how they
prayed to the stars for the purest benignity of their influences
and received them before any of their innocence had been lost
in the bed of the elements.

On all sides there the flowers, which have no other gardener
than nature, exhale a breath so sweet, though they are wild,
that it both pricks and satisfies the nostrils. There, neither the
crimson of a rose on the briar nor the brilliant azure of a
violet beneath the brambles leave one any freedom of choice,
for each enforces the judgement that it is lovelier than the
other. There the spring makes up all the seasons. No venomous plant germinates there, whose preservation is not betrayed by its very birth. The streams recount their travels in a
pleasant murmur to the pebbles. A thousand little feathered
throats make the woods there ring with the sound of their
melodious songs and the fluttering assembly of these divine
musicians is so ubiquitous that it seems as if every leaf in the
woods had adopted the shape and tongue of a nightingale,
and even the echo takes so much pleasure in their tunes that,
to hear her repeating them, you would think she desired to
learn them by heart.

Beside this wood there are two meadows to be seen. Their
