one, and if He were capable of love He would have more
tenderness for this cabbage you have in your hand, which
cannot offend Him, than for this man, whose offences against
Him He can already foresee and who would destroy Him if he
could. Furthermore, a man cannot be born without crime, for
he is a part of the first criminal: but we know very well that
the first cabbage did not offend its Creator in the earthly
paradise. It may be said that we are made in the image of the
Sovereign Being whereas the cabbage is not. But even if this
is true, in tarnishing our souls, which are what we resemble
Him by, we have destroyed the likeness, since there is nothing
more contrary to God than sin. And if our souls are no longer
portraits of Him, we do not resemble Him any more with our
feet, our hands, our mouths, our foreheads, and our eyes than
the cabbage does with its leaves, its flowers, its stalks, its stem,
and its head.

“Truly if this poor plant could speak, do you not think it
would say when it is being cut: “Man, my dear brother, what
have I done to you to deserve death? I only grow in your
gardens. You will never find me growing wild in places where
I could live in safety. I scorn to be the work of other hands
than yours. Hardly am I sown in your garden when to
show you my goodwill, I flourish, I stretch out my arms to
you, I offer you my children in seed and yet as a reward for my
courtesy you have my head cut off!”

“That is the speech this cabbage would make if it could
express itself. But what happens? Because it cannot complain, does that mean we have the right to do it all the harm
it cannot prevent? If I find a wretch in bonds, may I kill him
without committing a crime just because he cannot defend
himself? On the contrary, his impotence would make my
cruelty worse, for, however poor and deprived of all our
advantages this wretched creature may be, it does not deserve
death. What! Of all the blessings of existence the only one it
enjoys is that of vegetating and we deprive it of this! The sin
of massacring a man is not so great—for one day he will live
again—as that of cutting a cabbage and taking its life, since
