matter at this level is very dilute, on account of the great
amount of vacuum it contains, which, being inactive makes
it very lazy, this air could not produce more than a gentle
breeze as it passed through the hole in my box, which was
scarcely capable of sustaining it.

I never reflect upon the malicious caprices of fortune, who
continually opposed herself so obstinately to the success of my
enterprise, without being astonished at how I did not take
leave of my senses. But hearken to a miracle, which future
centuries will find difficult to believe.

Enclosed in a translucent box, which I had just lost from
view, with my impetus so reduced that I was lucky to keep
from falling—in short, in a predicament where the whole
system of the cosmos was powerless to save me—I found
myself stranded in a state of extreme distress. However, just
as when we are dying we are internally impelled to want to
embrace those to whom we owe our existence, so I raised my
eyes to the sun, our common father. This upsurge of my will
not only sustained my body, but projected it on towards the
thing it aspired to embrace. My body pushed my box and in
this fashion I continued my journey. As soon as I noticed this,
I stiffened all the faculties of my soul with more concentration than ever, in order to fasten them, in imagination, to
what attracted me. But the burden of my cabin on the top of
my head (for I was pressed against the ceiling in spite of
myself by the effects of my will) incommoded me to such an
extent that I was eventually constrained by its weight to feel
for the place where the invisible door was. Happily I found
it, opened it and flung myself out; but the natural fear of
falling, which all animals have when they are caught in midair, made me stretch out my arms briskly to catch hold of
something. I was only guided by an unthinking instinct of
nature, however, and that is why fortune, her enemy, maliciously thrust my hand against the crystal top.

Alas! How the sound of the icosahedron smashing to pieces
rang in my ears like a thunderclap! Such an accident, such a
misfortune, and such terror are beyond all description. The
