father became the grandfather of the children he had begotten
and the daughter gave birth to her own brothers.

‘But chance was not content with this one crime and desired
that a bull which had entered the gardens of King Minos
should unhappily find there beneath a tree of Orestes several
apples which it swallowed. I say “unhappily”, because Queen
Pasiphaé ate of this fruit every day. Behold the two of them
consumed with a raging love for one another! I will not
describe to you the enormity of its consummation. It will
suffice to say that Pasiphaé sank to a crime for which there
was no precedent.

‘At precisely the same time the famous sculptor, Pygmalion,
was carving a marble Venus at the palace. The queen, who
liked good workmen, presented him, as a ceremonial treat,
with a couple of these apples. He ate the finest of them and
because he happened to lack water, which, as you know, is
necessary for the cutting of marble, he moistened his statue
with the other. The marble at the same time, penetrated by
this juice, gradually grew soft and the energetic virtue of this
apple did its work according to the artist’s design, following
within the image the features it had encountered on the
surface. For it dilated, warmed, and coloured, in natural proportions, the parts it encountered in its passage. Finally the
marble came to life and, moved by the passion from the apple,
embraced Pygmalion with all the strength of its heart and
Pygmalion, transported by a corresponding love, received it
for his wife.

‘In this same province the young Iphis had eaten of this
fruit with the fair Ianthé, her companion, in all the circumstances necessary to cause a mutual friendship. Their feast
had its usual sequel but because Iphis had found it extremely
tasty she ate so much that her friendship, which increased
with the number of apples she ate—for she could not have
enough of them—usurped all the functions of love and,as this
love gradually increased, so it became more male and more
vigorous. For as her whole body, which was imbued with this
fruit, burned to perform the motions which corresponded to
