‘The first and most fundamental law for the administration of a republic is equality, but man would never be able to
endure this for long. He pursues us in order to devour us. He
convinces himself that we were only made for him, and
advances, in justification of his claim to superiority, the barbarous fashion in which he massacres us and the small resistance he encounters in overcoming our weakness—yet he will
not admit as his masters the eagles, the condors, and the
griffins, who can conquer the most robust of his kind.

‘But why should size and the arrangement of limbs indicate
a qualitative difference, since among themselves there are
both dwarfs and giants to be found?

‘Furthermore, their much vaunted mastery is an imaginary
privilege. On the contrary, they are so disposed to servility
that for fear of having no one to serve, they sell their liberty
to one another. Thus, the young are the slaves of the old, the
poor of the rich, the peasants of the gentry, the princes of the
monarchs, and even the monarchs are the slaves of the laws
they establish. But for all that, these poor serfs are so afraid of
lacking masters that, as though to guard against being surprised by liberty from some unexpected quarter, they fabricate gods for themselves all over the place: in the water, in the
air, in fire, and under the ground. They will make them out of
wood rather than not have any, and I believe they even
delude themselves with false hopes of immortality, less
because of their horror of ceasing to exist than from their
dread of having no one to order them about when they are
dead.

‘Such are the fine effects of this “sovereignty” of this
“natural mastery” of man over the animals—and over ourselves, for his insolence goes as far as that! And as a consequence of this preposterous “dominion”, he quite gaily arrogates to himself the rights of life and death over us. He sets
traps for us. He chains us up. He throws us into prison. He
slits our throats. He devours us. And he makes the right to kill
those of us left at liberty a privilege of the nobility. He
believes that the sun was lit to provide him with illumination
