obeyed their children as soon as they had reached what the
Senate of Philosophers considered to be the age of discretion.

‘You may be surprised,’ he went on, ‘at a custom so contrary
to that of your own country, but it is in no way repugnant to
common sense. For tell me, in all conscience, is not a hot
young man, who still has the power to imagine, judge, and
act, more capable of ruling a family than an infirm sixty-yearold—a poor dullard, his imagination chilled by the snows of
sixty winters, guided only by what you call his experience of
successful achievements (which were in fact the simple effects
of chance, contrary to all the rules governing human
prudence)?

‘As for judgement, he has little enough of it, although the
common herd in your world make it an attribute of old age.
But if they want the truth, they should realize that what is
called “prudence” in an old man is no more than a panic
apprehension, a wild fear which obsesses him of undertaking
anything at all. So when he refuses to take a risk, in a situation
where a young man comes to grief, it is not that he has foreseen the young man’s fate, but merely that he lacked sufficient
fire to spark off those noble impulses which make us dare to
act. The young man’s boldness, on the other hand, was like a
pledge for the success of his enterprise, because it was the
ardour which makes for speed and facility in performance
that prompted him to undertake it.

‘As for the matter of action, I should be insulting your intelligence if I offered proofs to convince you. You know that
youth alone is suited to deeds. But even if you are not wholly
persuaded of this, tell me, I pray you, when you respect a
courageous man, if it is not because he can take revenge on
your enemies or your oppressors? And is it from any other
consideration than pure habit that you have regard for him,
once a battalion of seventy Januaries has chilled his blood
and frozen to death all that noble enthusiasm for justice
which fires young people? When you defer to a man stronger
than yourself, are you not making him indebted to you for a
victory which you could not contest? Why then submit to
