Before he had finished these words, I pretended to faint
from weakness and let myself fall against a branch, from
which I adroitly stole an apple. Only a few more strides were
needed for me to step outside this delicious park. However,
my hunger tormented me so violently that it made me forget
I was in the hands of an enraged prophet. I pulled out one of
the apples I had crammed into my pocket and plunged my
teeth into it. But instead of my taking one of the ones Enoch
had given me, my hand fell upon the apple I had plucked
from the Tree of Knowledge and from which, unfortunately,
I had not removed the rind.

I had scarcely tasted it when a thick cloud enveloped my
mind: I no longer saw anyone beside me and I could not discover a single trace of the road I had taken anywhere on this
side of the horizon, but for all that, I did not lose the memory
of everything that had happened to me. When I have since
reflected on this miracle, I have surmised that the rind of the
fruit I had bitten into did not altogether stupefy me because
my teeth had gone right through it and tasted a little of the
juice which lay beneath it; and the energy of this had dissipated the ill effects of the rind. I remained surprised to find
myself alone in the middle of a country I did not know at all.
In vain I cast my eyes about me and scrutinized the landscape;
they could pick out no creature to console them. Finally I
resolved to continue walking until fortune brought me face
to face either with beasts of some kind or else with death.

She hearkened to me, for at the end of half a mile I encountered two very large animals, one of which stopped in front of
me while the other fled nimbly to its lair, at least so I presumed; for some time after that I saw it returning, accompanied by more than seven or eight hundred of the same
species, which surrounded me completely. When I could
observe them from close to, I discovered that they had bodies
and faces like ours. This occurrence reminded me of the tales
I had once heard from my nurse about sirens, fauns, and
satyrs. From time to time they raised hootings so furious,
doubtless caused by their amazement at seeing me, that I
