aunt, Catherine, and his friends at a house in Paris. Here he
worked over the manuscripts of L’Autre Monde until they
were stolen—or removed by friends in order to save them
from destruction at the hands of the pious nuns, who were
also in attendance. They later came into the hands of Le Bret,
but he, in turn, was robbed of the third book, L’Etincelle,
which has never come to light. Cyrano moved to the house of
his cousin, Pierre de Cyrano at Sannois, where he died in July
1655, at the age of thirty-six, probably of the malady which
had kept him away from the opposite sex for the last ten years
of his life. Apparently he made a Christian end.

In 1657 Le Bret published the first book of L’Autre Monde
as the Voyage dans la Lune. Himself about to take orders,
Le Bret undoubtedly whitewashed his friend in the prefatory
account of his life, not merely glossing over the more disreputable aspects of it, but also apologizing for the very idea
of presenting the moon as a world. He cites Heraclitus,
Gassendi, and others as supporters of the view but praises
Cyrano for treating it lightly rather than seriously (this nearly
fifty years after Galileo had observed its surface through a
telescope and said, ‘it is full of irregularities, uneven, full of
hollows and protuberances, just like the surface of the earth
itself’), Le Bret also cut out all the obviously blasphemous or
bawdy passages. The full version of the first book (the second
book remains incomplete) was preserved in a manuscript in
either Cyrano’s hand or that of a friend. This was published
in 1920.

Bowdlerized by Le Bret, the book achieved some success as
a comical history, and was soon joined in print by the second
part, L’Histoire des Etats et Empires du Soleil (the source of
the manuscript is unknown). Before the end of the century
there were several more editions and two English versions.
‘There was a new edition in 1741 and then Cyrano seems to
have been forgotten for almost a hundred years.

In 1838 Charles Nodier in his Bulletin du Bibliophile
praised Cyrano, as did Théophile Gautier in a highly in-
