reason that they could not know all men; that I knew nothing
of the Seine carrying ships to Paris; that I had no message for
my Lord the Marshal of the Hospital, and that I carried no
brandy at all.

‘Oho,’ they said, taking me by the arm, ‘so you want to play
the clown. My Lord the Governor will know you all right! ’

‘They led me towards their troop, where I learned that I was
indeed in France—in New France. Some little time later I was
presented to the Viceroy, who asked me my country, my name,
and my quality. I satisfied him by relating the happy outcome
of my voyage and, whether he believed it or only pretended to
do so, he had the goodness to arrange for me to be given a
room in his house. My joy was great at meeting a man capable
of lofty reasoning, who was not at all surprised when I told
him that the earth must have revolved during the course of
my levitation, since I had begun my ascent two leagues away
from Paris and had come down almost perpendicularly in
Canada.

In the evening, as I was going to bed, he came into my room
and said to me, ‘I should not have come to disturb your rest if
I did not believe that a person who can discover the secret of
covering so much ground in half a day must also possess that
of avoiding all fatigue.

‘But you do not know what an amusing argument I have
been having with our Jesuit Fathers about you,’ he added.
‘They absolutely insist that you are a sorcerer and the greatest
compliment you can expect from them is not to be considered
an imposter. Indeed, this motion, which you attribute to the
earth, is a somewhat ticklish paradox. To be frank with you,
the reason I do not share your opinion is that even if you left
Paris yesterday, you could still have arrived in this country
without the earth having revolved at all. For if the sun lifted
you by means of your bottles, would it not have brought you
here, since, according to Ptolemy and the modern philosophers, it travels in the direction you attribute to the earth?
What great semblance of truth makes you judge the sun to be
motionless when we can see it travelling? And is it likely that
