turn somersaults and make faces. And after dinner he collected a certain price at the door from those who wanted to
see me.

But heaven was softened by my wretchedness and angered
to see the temple of its Master profaned and one day brought
it to pass that when I was attached to the end of a rope, with
which the charlatan was making me prance to divert the
gaping mob, one of the spectators, after considering me very
attentively, asked me in Greek who I was. I was greatly astonished to hear someone in that country speaking as men do in
our world. He questioned me for some time. I answered his
questions and then told him the whole story of the adventure
and the outcome of my voyage. He comforted me, and I remember him saying to me: ‘Well, my son, now at last you are
tasting the distress which is caused by the follies of your own
world. There is a common herd here, as there is there, which
cannot tolerate the thought of anything to which it is not
accustomed. But you must realize that you are only being
given some of your own medicine, for if anyone from this earth
went up to yours and had the effrontery to call himself a man,
your learned doctors would have him stifled as a monster or
an ape possessed of the devil.’

He then promised me that he would notify the court of my
misfortune and added that as soon as he had heard the news
going round about me, he had come to see me and recognized
me as a man from the world whence I said I came. My country
was the moon and I was from Gaul, for he had once travelled
there and had lived in Greece where he was known as the
Demon of Socrates. Following the death of this philosopher
he had governed and instructed Epaminondas at Thebes.
Then he had gone to live among the Romans where justice
had attached him to the cause of Cato the Younger and, after
his death, he had given his services to Brutus. Since all these
great men had left nothing in their place in that world but
the ghosts of their virtues, he and his companions had withdrawn to temples and lonely places.
