tombs of Aesculapius, of Scipio, of Alexander, of Charles the
Hammer and of Edward of England, still feeding off the
corpses of their hosts.’

‘Yes indeed,’ I said, interrupting him, ‘I have noticed how,
as this serpent is always trying to escape from man’s body, you
can see its head and neck emerging at the bottom of our
bellies. Furthermore, God does not suffer man alone to be
tormented by it: it was His will that it should rise up against
woman to inject its poison into her and that the swelling
should last for nine months after the bite. And the proof that
I speak according to the word of the Lord is that He curses the
serpent, saying that in vain will it cause woman to stumble by
hardening itself against her, for in the end she will bruise its
head.’

I would have continued with these trifles, but Elijah prevented me. ‘Consider,’ he said, ‘that this place is holy.’

Then he fell silent for a time, as if to recall the point he had
reached, after which he spoke these words: ‘I only partake of
the Fruit of Life once in every hundred years. Its juice has a
taste whose character is somewhat akin to that of wine. I
believe it was the apple Adam ate which made our forefathers
live so long, because something of its energy had passed into
their seed, until it was finally extinguished in the waters of the
Flood. The Tree of Knowledge is planted opposite. Its fruit
is covered with a rind which induces ignorance in whoever
tastes it. The intellectual virtues of this learned food are conserved beneath the thickness of this peel. In the days when
God had driven Adam out of this blessed land, He rubbed his
gums with the peel for fear that he might find his way back.
From that moment his wits wandered for more than fifteen
years and he forgot everything to such a point that neither he
nor any of his descendants until Moses even remembered the
Creation. But the remaining effects of this sluggish rind were
finally dissipated by the warmth and the brilliance of the
genius of that Great Prophet.

‘By happy chance I addressed myself to one of these apples
which was ripe enough to have shed its skin and hardly had
