I gathered up and ate several of them, as he told me to, and
truly I have never tasted anything so delicious in all my life.

After this breakfast we made ourselves ready to leave, and
with a thousand grimaces such as they employ when they
want to display affection, the host took a paper from my
demon. I asked him if it was a bond for the amount the bill
came to. He retorted that it was not, that the account was now
settled and that it was some verses.

‘How do you mean, verses?’ I rejoined. ‘Are the innkeepers
here connoisseurs of rhymes, then?’

‘It is,’ he said, ‘the currency of the country, and the expenses we have just incurred here finally added up to a stanza
of six lines, which is what I have given him. I was not afraid of
running short, for even if we feasted here for a week, we
should not be able to run through a sonnet and I have four of
them on me, as well as two epigrams, two odes, and an
eclogue.’

“Well to be sure,’ I said to myself, ‘this is just the currency
which Sorel makes Hortensius use in Francion, I remember.
Doubtless this is where he got it from: but who the devil could
have told him about it? It must have been his mother, for I
have heard tell that she was a lunatic.’

‘And would to God,’ I said aloud, ‘that it were the same in
our world! I can think of many honest poets there who are
starving to death and who would live like fighting cocks if
innkeepers were paid in this coin.’

I asked him if these verses continued to be legal tender provided one copied them out again. He replied that they did not
and went on: ‘When some have been composed, the author
brings them to the Court of the Mint, where the Jury of Poets
of the Realm hold their sessions. There these Officers of
Versification put the pieces to the test and if they are judged
to be of good alloy, they are taxed not according to their
weight but according to their wit, that is to say a sonnet is not
always worth one sonnet: it depends upon the merit of the
piece. ‘’hus when someone starves to death it is never anyone
