From that time hence we spoke of nothing but our pleasure.
One day we would hunt, another we would ride, another we
would receive visitors, sometimes we went visiting; but at
length we would always leave off each pastime before we had
begun to grow weary of it.

The Marquis of Cussan, a neighbour of Colignac’s and a
man with an excellent taste for the good things of life, was
generally of our company and we of his. In order to make our
sojourns still more agreeable by varying the scene, we would
go from Colignac to Cussan and return from Cussan to
Colignac. As for our pleasures, the innocent ones of which the
body is capable only made up the lesser portion of them. We
forewent none of those such as the mind can take, in study
and conversation: our libraries, combined like our minds,
summoned all learned men to our company. We mixed reading with conversation, conversation with good fare and this
with excursions to fish and hunt. In a word, we enjoyed both
ourselves, so to speak, and all the most delightful things
nature has provided for our use, allowing reason alone to
limit our desires.

To the detriment of my peace of mind, however, my reputation spread through all the neighbouring villages and even
the towns of the province. Attracted by this rumour, everybody found a pretext for coming to see the squire in order to
have a look at the sorcerer. When I came out from the castle,
not merely the children and women but even the men stared
at me as if I were the Beast, and chief among them was the
Curé of Colignac, who, from ignorance or malice, was
secretly my greatest enemy. Though apparently a simple man,
whose lowly and ingenuous spirit was infinitely charming in
its ingenuousness, he was in fact extremely mischievous. He
was vindictive to the point of madness, more backbiting than
a Norman and such a trickster that a love of chicanery was his
ruling passion. He had a lawsuit of long standing with his
squire, whom he hated all the more because he had found
him firm in resisting his attacks. He feared his resentment and
at one time he had wanted to change his benefice in order to

