able one with a reputation for ignorance. For he will be of the
opinion that if our imagination works for our health, it is
capable of curing us, providing it is aided by remedies,
whereas the most powerful of these are too weak if the
imagination does not come to their assistance.

‘Are you surprised that the first men in your world lived for
so many centuries without any knowledge of medicine? No.
And what do you think the reason could be, if it was not the
original resilience of their constitutions and the universal
balm—that your doctor’s drugs, which are now using you
up, have still not succeeded in dissipating? In order to
achieve convalescence in those days, they had only to desire it
strongly and imagine themselves to be cured. Their vigorous
imagination would plunge into this vital oil and draw forth
the elixir, and by applying an active remedy to the passive
disease, they found themselves as healthy as before, almost in
the twinkling of an eye. Despite the corruption of nature, this
still continues to happen today—although rather rarely, in
fact—and the populace attribute it to a miracle. But for my
part, I do not believe that at all, basing my opinion on the
fact that it is easier for all the doctors to be mistaken than for
this not to be so.

‘For I say to them: during the course of his illness it seems
likely that this man, who has just recovered from a fever, very
much desired to be cured and even made vows to this end.
Now he was absolutely bound either to die, or to remain sick,
or to get well. If he had died it would have been said that God
wanted to recompense him for his suffering (or one might
even indulge in malicious irony and say that He had indeed
heard the sick man’s prayers and cured him of all his ills! ). If
he had remained unwell it would have been said that he had
no faith. But since he is cured it is “quite evidently” a
miracle! Yet is it not much more probable that his imagination, excited by his violent desire for health, has done its
work? In this example I let the man be cured, but why cry
“miracle”, since we can see so many people who have also
made vows, perishing miserably, along with their vows?’

