cess gratifying the passion of a bull, a man aspiring to enjoy a
block of stone and another marrying himself; to see this girl
celebrating as a maiden a marriage she consummated asa boy,
and this man ceasing to be a man without becoming a woman,
turning into a twin outside his mother’s womb and the twin
of a person who is no blood relation—all this is far removed
from the ordinary ways of nature. Nevertheless, what I am
going to tell you now will surprise you even more.

‘Amidst the sumptuous variety of fruits of all kinds which
were brought from the most distant climates to celebrate the
wedding of Cambyses, he was presented with a cutting from a
tree of Orestes, which he had grafted on to a plane tree. And
among the other delicacies served him for the dessert were
apples from the same tree.

‘So tasty was this fruit that he was tempted to eat a great
deal of it, and when its substance had been converted, after
the triple ripening, into a perfect seed, he formed of it, in the
queen’s belly, the embryo of his son, Artaxerxes—for such
were the peculiarities of his life that his doctors conjectured
he must have been produced in this manner.

‘When the prince’s young heart was of an age to undergo
the torments of love, he was never observed to sigh for his
fellow humans. He loved only trees, orchards, and woods, but
above all others to which he seemed susceptible, he was consumed with passion for the fine plane tree, on to which his
father Cambyses had once had grafted that cutting of Orestes.

‘His constitution followed so closely the progress of this
plane tree that he seemed to grow even as the branches grew.
Every day he went to embrace it. When sleeping he dreamed
of nothing else and he conducted all his affairs beneath the
spread of its green canopy. It was clear to all that the plane
tree returned his passion and was entranced with his caresses.
All the time, for no apparent reason, one could see its leaves
fluttering, as if they were trembling with delight and its
branches curving round his head as if to make him a crown
and coming down so close to his face that it was easy to see
