‘It is true that I have come from that province,’ the woman
continued, ‘but I am, like all my forebears, a native of the
Kingdom of Truth. My mother bore me there and had no
other children. She brought me up in that country until,
when I was thirteen, the King commanded her, on the advice
of the doctors, to take me to the Kingdom of Lovers (from
whence I have just come) so that I might be raised in the
Palace of Love and receive a gayer and gentler education than
that of our country, which would make me more fertile than
she had been. My mother took me there and put me into that
house of pleasure.

‘I suffered a good deal before I had grown accustomed to
their ways. At first these seemed very primitive, for, as you
know, the opinions which we have imbibed with our mothers’
milk always seem to us the most reasonable, and I had only
just arrived from the Kingdom of Truth, my native country.

‘I did not fail to appreciate that this Nation of Lovers lived
much more gently and indulgently than ours, for although
every man announced that the sight of me caused dangerous
wounds, that my glances were deadly and that my eyes gave
out a fire which consumed their hearts, yet the good nature of
every one of them, especially the young men, was so great that
they caressed me, kissed me, and embraced me, instead of
taking revenge upon me for the harm I had done to them. I
even grew angry with myself about the distress I was causing,
so that, moved by pity, I one day revealed to them that I had
resolved to take flight.

‘“But alas! How can we save you?” they all cried, throwing themselves at my neck and kissing my hands. “Your house
is surrounded with water and the danger appears to be so
great that, but for a miracle, you and we should certainly be
drowned already.” ’ :

‘How so?’ I interrupted. ‘Is the Country of Lovers subject
to flooding?’

‘It must be said that it is,’ she answered me. ‘For one of my
lovers (who would not have wished to deceive me—since he
loved me) wrote to me that in his grief at my departure he had
