the jawbone of an ass; Jupiter, King of Crete, with artificial
fire, which he used to imitate thunderbolts and subdue his
enemies; and Hercules, finally, conquered tyrants and tamed
monsters with a club.

‘But these two metals have yet another far more specific
connection with our two trees. You must know that although
our pair of inanimate lovers turn towards the pole, they never
go that way except in one another’s company. And I will
reveal the reason for this when I have talked to you a little
about the poles.

‘The poles are the mouths of heaven, through which it
takes back the light, heat, and influences which it has spread
over the earth. Otherwise, if all these treasures from the sun
did not return to their source it would long ago have been
extinguished and would shine no more (for all its brilliance is
simply a dust of blazing atoms which travel from its globe)—
while the abundance of these little fiery bodies accumulating
upon the earth without leaving it would already have consumed it in flames. There must therefore, as I have told you,
be ventilators in the sky, through which the excesses of the
earth can be disgorged, and others through which the losses
of the heavens can be made good, so that the eternal circulation of these little living bodies may penetrate successively all
the globes of this great universe. Now these ventilators in
heaven are the poles, through which it feeds on the souls of
all that die in its worlds, and all the stars are the mouths and
the pores through which its spirits are exhaled once more.

‘But just to show you that this is not such a new idea, when
your ancient poets, to whom philosophy had revealed the
innermost secrets of nature, spoke of a hero, of whom they
wished to say that his soul had gone to dwell with the gods,
they expressed themselves thus: ‘““He has ascended to the
pole,” “He is seated at the pole,” “He has crossed the pole.”
For they knew that the poles were the only entrances through
which heaven admits all that has come from it.

‘If the authority of these great men does not satisfy you
fully, then the experience of your moderns who have voyaged
