their identity, but when the transports of their affection had
abated a little, I recognized my dear Colignac and the brave
Marquis. Colignac had his arm in a sling and Cussan was the
first to come to his senses.

‘Alas!’ he said. ‘We should never have suspected that such
a disaster had befallen you, had it not been for your horse
and the mule arriving at the gates of my castle that night.
Their breast straps, saddle girths, and cruppers were all
broken and that gave us some intimation of your misfortune.
We mounted at once and had not ridden two or three leagues
towards Colignac before the whole country, which was buzzing with the incident, gave us the particular circumstances.
We at once galloped as far as the town, where you were in
prison, but learning there of your escape, from the current
rumour that you had made off in the direction of Toulouse,
we came on here at full speed with those of our people we
had with us.

“The first person we asked for news of you said that you had
been recaptured. On the instant we spurred our horses
towards this prison, but some other people assured us that
you had vanished from the hands of the sergeants. And as we
continued in our way, citizens were telling one another that
you had become invisible. At length, after making good use
of our tongues, we learned that having captured, lost, and
recaptured you heaven knows how many times, they were
taking you to the prison in the great tower. We cut off your
constables’ road, met them head on, attacked them, fought
them, and put them to flight with an advantage to ourselves
more apparent than actual. But as for what became of you,
we were unable to learn, even from the wounded men we took
prisoner, until this morning someone came and told us that,
in trying to escape, you had blindly come to the gaol yourself.

‘Colignac was wounded in several places but only very
lightly. For the rest, we have come to make an application for
you to be housed in the best chamber here. As you love the
open air, we have had a small single apartment furnished for
