we give you our word of honour to have him burnt without
any scandal.’

At these words Colignac, although he was pressing his fists
into his sides, could not contain himself. He was seized by a
spasm of laughter which offended the gentlemen, his relatives, not a little, so that he was unable to reply to any of the
points in their harangue except by a repeated: ha ha ha ha!
or ho ho ho ho! Thereupon our gentlemen departed, highly
scandalized, and I would say that they had received short
shrift—had it. not been such a very long way back to
Toulouse.

When they had gone, I drew Colignac into his study and, as
soon as I had closed the door behind us, I said to him: “Count,
these ambassadors with long hair seem like bearded comets to
me. I am afraid that the sound and fury of their outburst may
be the rumble of a shaking thunderbolt which is about to fall.
Although their accusation may be ridiculous and may well be
caused by their stupidity, I should not be any the less dead if
a dozen intelligent people, who had seen me roasted, afterwards declared my judges to be fools. All their proofs of my
innocence would not bring me to life again and my ashes
would stay as cold in a tomb as in the common sewer. ‘That is
why, unless you can give me better advice, I should gladly
yield to the temptation which bids me leave them nothing of
me in this province but my portrait. For I should be doubly
vexed to die for something I can scarcely believe myself.’

Colignac had barely the patience to wait for me to finish
before replying. At first he teased me, however, but then he
saw that I was taking it seriously. ‘Ha! By God,’ he exclaimed
with a look of alarm. “They shall not touch the hem of your
cloak without myself, my friends, my vassals, and all those
who respect me perishing first. My house is such that it
cannot be stormed without cannon. It is very advantageously
situated and well protected on the flank. But I am insane to
be taking precautions against mere parchment storms.’

‘They are sometimes more to be feared,’ I answered, ‘than
those from the middle region of the air.’
