7accurate account in Les Grotesques (1844). Gautier penned a
whimsical description of Cyrano’s face, based on the extant
portraits. It is vivid and exaggerated. His surprising description of Cyrano’s big aquiline nose as ‘the highest mountain in
the world after the Himalayas’ helped, along with some of
Dassoucy’s insults, to lay the foundations for Rostand’s creation. Cyrano’s own comments on the subject of large noses
appear in L’Autre Monde.

New editions appeared in 1855 and 1858. The general
picture of Cyrano remained confused, and the success of
Rostand’s play in 1897 confused matters still more. The freethinking martyr to clerical fanatics, who had pursued him
beyond the grave by destroying copies of his works whenever
they came upon them, hardly fitted in with the grotesque
hero nursing a broken heart. And did he come from Gascony
or did he not? Rostand cannot be blamed for using legends
and superficial local colour in order to write good theatre
rather than good history. His borrowings from Cyrano’s own
work, however, now seem rather feeble and his portrayal of
the man who satirized the tearful amorous swains of precious
literature as one of them himself is rather a cheek.

In 1920 Frédéric Lachévre published the full text of
L’ Autre Monde, and wrote an account of Cyrano’s life which
distinguished critically between fact and fiction. He himself
shows a curious distaste for Cyrano as a spendthrift, petulant
blasphemer. He was of course anxious to give the emphatic
lie to all the legends: Cyrano was not a nobleman; he was not
the worthy, martyred free-thinker of innocent nineteenth
century myth—any more than Galileo was an uncomplicated
Resistance hero who quipped ‘and yet it moves’ as he signed
away the Copernican theory. A little of Lachévre’s distaste
was perhaps shared by Richard Aldington, who translated
the book into English for the first time since 1754 shortly after
Lachévre’s edition was published. Aldington praises the liveliness of the book, but one feels he might have preferred
Cyrano to have omitted his physics and his travesties of myth
and scripture, to have been more logical, more classical, more
