narrower, but deeper, is called Imagination; the third,
smaller than the others, is called Judgement.

All day long on the banks of Memory one hears an importunate chattering of jays, parrots, magpies, starlings, linnets,
finches, and all those species that twitter what they have
learned by heart. At night they say nothing, for then they are
busy drinking up the thick vapour of these watery regions.
But their dyspeptic stomachs find this so hard to digest that
in the morning one sees it all spilling out of their beaks again,
in as pure a state as when it was in the river.

The water of this river appears glutinous and makes a great
deal of noise as it flows. The echoes which are set up in its
caves repeat a word more than a thousand times over. It
begets certain monsters whose faces bear a kind of resemblance to those of women, and one also sees another wilder
type there, which are blockheaded, with horns, and look more
or less like our pedants. These spend all their time yammering, but only repeat what they hear each other say.

The river of Imagination flows more softly. Its liquor is
light and brilliant and everywhere flashing. If one looks at
this water it seems like a torrent of liquid sparks, which follow
no fixed order as they flit past. But, having considered it more
attentively, I noticed that the fluid travelling along its bed
was pure potable gold and its foam was oil of talc. The fishes
it supports are remoras, sirens, and salamanders. And instead
of gravel one finds in its bed those stones that Pliny speaks of
which make one heavy when one touches them one side and
light when one touches the other. I also noticed there some of
those others, from which Gyges had a ring made, that render
one invisible. But above all there are a great number of philosopher’s stones shining in the sand there. Along the banks
were a multitude of fruit trees, particularly those which
Mohammed found in paradise. The branches swarmed with
phoenixes, and I observed seedlings of that apple tree from
which Discord plucked the fruit she threw at the feet of the
three goddesses. Cuttings had been grafted on to them from
the garden of the Hesperides.
