of Moses, for this great patriarch had expressly said that God
created it in six days. The ignoramus merely laughed instead
of replying, and I was driven to tell him that since they had
come to that, I was beginning to believe that their world was
nothing but a moon.

‘But,’ they all said to me, ‘you can see earth here, rivers and
seas. What could they all be?’

‘Never mind!’ I retorted. ‘Aristotle assures us that it is only
the moon, and if you had said the opposite in the classes
where I did my studies, you would have been hissed.’

At this there was a great outburst of laughter. There is no
need to ask whether this was due to their ignorance, but at all
events they led me back to my cage.

The priests, however, were more outraged than this assembly had been. When they learned that I had dared to say that
the moon I came from was a world and that their world was
only a moon, they believed that this furnished a good enough
pretext for having me condemned to the water, which is their
method of exterminating atheists. ‘To this end they went in
a body to make their complaint to the King who promised
them justice and commanded that I should be put in the
dock.

So there I was, uncaged for the third time. The most
ancient of them took the floor then and pleaded against me.
I do not remember his speech because I was too alarmed to
make out the elements of his voice without confusion and also
because he used an instrument for declaiming, the sound of
which quite deafened me. It was a trumpet which he had
deliberately chosen so that the violence of its martial sound
might excite a desire for my death in their minds and so that
this emotion should prevent their reason from performing its
office, as happens in our armies where the hurly-burly of
trumpets and drums keeps the soldier from reflecting upon
the importance of his life. When he had spoken, I rose to
plead my case, but I was spared this by an adventure which
will surprise you. Just as I had opened my mouth, a man who
had had great difficulty in penetrating the throng came and
