they might grow weary, I transformed myself into a nightingale, in order to sweeten their task with the charms of music.
I accompanied the rapid flight of my people without flying
myself, for I was perched upon the head of one of my vassals,
and we were continuing on our way as usual when a nightingale, which lived in a province of the opaque country which
we were then crossing, astonished to see me in the power of an
eagle (for it could not do otherwise than take us for our outward shapes), began to lament my misfortune. I called my
people to a halt and we flew down to the tops of several trees,
where this charitable bird was sighing.

‘I took so much pleasure in the sweetness of its sad songs,
that in order to have more time and leisure to enjoy them, I
had no desire to undeceive it. I invented a story on the spot,
in which I related the imaginary misfortunes which had made
me fall into the hands of this eagle. I brought in such amazing
adventures, summoning up my passions so adroitly and choosing each note of my song so well, that the nightingale was
beside itself.

‘We serenaded one another by turns with the musical
stories of our mutual loves. In my airs I sang that I was not
only comforted but that I even rejoiced at my disaster since it
had won me the honour of being lamented in such beautiful
songs. And the inconsolable little bird replied to me in its
own that it would have accepted with joy all the esteem in
which I held it, if it could have had the knowledge that this
might make it worthy of the honour of dying in my place. But
since fortune had not reserved so much honour for a wretch
like itself, it would only accept as much of my esteem as was
needed to save me from blushing to be its friend.

‘I replied in my turn with all the raptures, all the tenderness, and all the subtleties of a passion so moving that two or
three times I saw it on the branch ready to die of love. In
truth, I mixed so much skill with the sweetness of my voice
and surprised its ear with touches so cunning and ways so
little frequented by its own species, that I had its fair soul at
the mercy of all the passions to which I wished to subject it.
