bornness of my fate, and win over its malevolence. But to
what other invention could I have had recourse? For in crossing a great town like Toulouse, where prints of me had made
me known even to the fishwives, clad in an assortment of rags
as motley as a harlequin’s, was it not likely that I should be
noticed and recognized immediately and that the only
counter-charm was the character of a beggar, a role which
may be played with all kinds of faces? And then if I had not
planned this ruse and all the precautions that went with it, I
should have had to be very strong-minded not to be driven
mad in the midst of such an unhappy predicament.

I was therefore proceeding on my way, when all of a sudden
I felt compelled to retrace my steps, for my revered gaoler
and some dozen constables of his acquaintance, who had
delivered him from the hands of the riff-raff, after giving chase
and patrolling all the town in search of me, had unfortunately appeared in my path. As soon as they caught sight of
me with their lynx eyes, it was but the work of a moment for
them to begin to fly with all their strength and for me to take
flight with all mine. I was so hotly pursued that sometimes my
liberty felt upon the back of its neck the breath of the tyrants
who sought to oppress it. But it seemed that the air they were
driving along, as they ran behind me, drove me along in front
of them. Finally either heaven or fear gave me a lead of four
or five side streets. It was then that my hunters missed the
scent and the spoor and I the sight and the din of this alarming chase.

I am sure that anyone who has not been through such
agonies, for I speak as one who has, would find it hard to get
the measure of the joy which left me trembling all over, when
I saw that I had escaped. However, because my safety demanded the whole of my attention, I resolved to be very thrifty
in making use of the time they took to catch up with me.I
dirtied my face, rubbed dust into my hair, stripped off my ~
doublet, lowered my breeches and threw my hat in at a cellar
window. Then I spread out my handkerchief on the pave-
