by dint of piling image upon image, that, not being able to
contain them any longer, it has exploded. This way of dying is
that of the great geniuses and it is called “bursting with
intelligence”.’

We continued on our way, conversing all the time, and
whatever came next to our eyes furnished us with matter for
discussion. I should, in fact, have very much liked to leave the
opaque regions of the sun and re-enter the luminous ones. For
the reader will remember that the countries there are not all
diaphanous: there are some which are shadowy, like those in
our world, and which would be shrouded in darkness if it
were not for the light of a sun which can be seen from there.
As one gradually enters the opaque regions one becomes
opaque oneself and, similarly, when one approaches the transparent ones, one feels oneself stripped of this dark obscurity
by the vigorous irradiation of the climate.

I remember that, with regard to this burning desire of
mine, I asked Campanella if the province of the philosophers
was brilliant or shadowy.

‘It is more shadowy than brilliant,’ he replied, ‘for as we are
still very much in sympathy with the earth, our native
country, which is by nature opaque, we should not be comfortable in the most illuminated regions of this globe. We can,
however, make ourselves diaphanous by means of a vigorous
effort of will power, when the fancy takes us, and it is even
true to say that the majority of the philosophers do not use
their tongues for talking. When they wish to communicate
their thoughts, their flights of imagination purge them of the
sombre vapour, beneath which they generally keep their ideas
hidden. As soon as they have driven back to its seat the dark
spleen which obscured them, their bodies become diaphanous
and one can see the things they remember, imagine, and judge
in their brains, and the things they desire and resolve in their
livers and their hearts. For although these little images are
more imperceptible than anything else we can think of in this
world, we have eyes sharp enough to make out even the very
minor ideas with ease.
