ment, that to escape would be an enterprise beyond the power
of man, my friends looked at one another and then turned
their eyes towards me and began to weep. But, as if our grief
had all at once softened the wrath of heaven, a sudden joy
took possession of my soul, the joy attracted hope and the
hope, a secret enlightenment, which so dazzled my brain that
with an irrational exultation which seemed ridiculous even
to myself, I said to them: ‘Go! Go and wait for me at
Colignac. I shall be there in three days. And send me all the
mathematical instruments I generally use for my work. Apart
from these, you will find a large box containing a number of
crystals cut in various fashions: do not forget these—but the
quickest way will be to specify the things I need in a
memorandum.’

They took charge of the note I gave them, without being
able to fathom what my intention was, after which I sent them
away.

From the moment of their departure I did nothing but
reflect upon the execution of the things which I had planned,
and I was still reflecting upon them the following day when
everything I had listed in my catalogue was brought to me
from them. One of Colignac’s servants told me that his master
had not been seen since the previous day and that no one
knew what had become of him. I was not disturbed by this
news, because it occurred to me that he might possibly have
gone to court to solicit for my release. I therefore set to work
without anxiety. For eight days I hewed, I planed, I glued,
and by the end of it I had constructed the machine which I
shall now describe to you.

It was a large, very light box, which closed very tightly. It
was six feet high or thereabouts and three feet square. ‘There
was a hole in the bottom of the box; on the top of the roof,
which also had one in it, I placed a vessel of crystal, which
was similarly pierced. This was made in the form of a very
capacious globe, with a neck which was finished off evenly
and fitted into the aperture I had fashioned in the top of the
box.
