This vessel was deliberately constructed with a number of
surfaces, however, in the form of an icosahedron, and as each
facet was both convex and concave, my ball produced the
effect of a dazzling mirror.

Neither the gaoler nor his turnkeys ever came up to my
room, without finding me busy at this task, but they were not
surprised at this, on account of the variety of ingenious pieces
of machinery which they saw about the place, and of which I
told them I was the inventor. Among other things there were
a wind clock, an artificial eye, with which one can see at night,
and a sphere on which the stars move as they do in the sky.
All this led them to believe that the machine on which I was
working was a similar curiosity—and then the money with
which Colignac greased their palms helped them to tread
softly along many difficult paths.

It was nine o’clock.one morning, my gaoler had gone down,
and the sky was overcast, when I brought this machine out
on to the summit of my tower, that is to say on to the most
exposed part of my terrace. It could be sealed so tightly that
not a single particle of air could squeeze inside, except
through the two apertures. Inside it I had fitted a small, very
light plank, which served me as a seat.

Everything being arranged in this way, I shut myself inside
it and remained there for nearly an hour, awaiting the
dictates of fortune.

When the clouds cleared from the sun and it began to shine
upon my machine, the transparent icosahedron caught the
solar riches upon its facets and transmitted their light into my
cell through the medium of the glass jar. As this splendour
was enfeebled, because the rays could not bend without being
split up many times, so the powerful light was refracted and
converted my chamber into a miniature heaven of gilded
purple.

In the midst of my raptures over the beauty of this rainbow
of colours, I suddenly feel my stomach quivering, like that of
a man being lifted up by a block and tackle.

I was going to open my hatch in order to learn the cause of
