opinion, but it was seen that the sky was clouding over and
looked heavy. This caused the assembly to rise.

I was left under the impression that the threat of bad
weather had provoked this, until the Attorney General came
and told me, by order of the Court, that I should not be
judged all that day. A criminal case was never settled when
the sky was not serene, because they were afraid that the bad
atmospheric conditions might have some effect upon the
sound constitution of the judges’ minds and that the mood of
depression which overcomes birds when it rains might
influence the course of the trial, indeed, that the Court might
vent its ill humour upon the accused. That is why the judgement of my case was put off until the weather improved. I was
therefore taken back to prison and I remember that my
charitable magpie hardly deserted me all the way. It flew at
my side continually and I believe it would not have left me
at all, if its companions had not approached us.

At last I arrived at my prison, where I was fed during my
captivity on nothing but ‘the King’s bread,’ this being their
name for some four dozen worms and as many maggots, which
they brought for me to eat every seven hours.

I was expecting to appear in court again on the following
day and everybody thought the same, but after five or six
days one of my guards told me that all this time had been
taken to dispense justice to a community of goldfinches who
had implored it against one of their companions. I asked this
guard what crime the wretch was accused of.

‘Of the crime,’ replied the guard, ‘of the most terrible
crime with which a bird’s name can be sullied. He is accused
—would you ever believe it? He is accused—But, Gods! the
very thought of it makes the feathers on my head stand on
end. In short, he is accused of not having deserved a friend for
the past six years! That is why he has been condemned to be
a King—and the King of a different species from his own.

‘If his subjects had been of his own kind, he could at least
have feasted his eyes and his longing upon their pleasures:
but as the delights of one species have no connection with
