planted and was carried out of paradise by the current to a
place where poor Enoch was fishing in order to keep body and
soul together. The fine fruit was caught in the net. He ate it.
At once he knew where the earthly paradise was and, thanks
to secrets such as you could not conceive, unless, like him, you
had eaten of the Apple of Knowledge, he came to live here.

‘But now I must tell you the manner in which I came here
myself. You have not, I think, forgotten that my name is
Elijah, for I told you this just now. Know then, that I used to
live in your world and that I dwelt with Elisha, a Hebrew like
myself, on the banks of the Jordan. There among my books
I lived a life pleasant enough for me not to regret it, although
it is over. However, the more enlightenment my mind
acquired, the greater my awareness became of that which I
did not possess. Not once did our priests remind me of the
illustrious Adam without the memory of his perfect philosophy making me heave a sigh. I had despaired of ever being
able to attain to it, when one day, after I had sacrificed to expiate the frailties of my mortal being, I fell asleep and the
Angel of the Lord appeared to me in a dream. As soon as I
awoke I undertook every one of the tasks he had prescribed
for me. I procured about two cubic feet of loadstone, which I
put into a furnace. When it was well purged, precipitated,
and melted, I drew off the calcinated magnet and reduced it to
about the size of a middling cannon ball.

‘Following these preparations, I had an extremely light
iron chariot built, and several months later, when all my contrivances were completed, I entered my ingenious wagon. You
may perhaps ask me what all this paraphernalia was for. But
you must know that the Angel had told me in my dream that
if I wished to acquire a science as perfect as I desired, I must
go up to the moon, where I should find the Tree of Knowledge in Adam’s paradise. Once I had tasted of its fruit, my
soul would be enlightened with all the truths which one of
God’s creatures is capable of comprehending. So this was the
voyage for which I had built my chariot.

‘At length I climbed into it and, when I was well and truly
