carried me to freedom. But unfortunately for me, the looks
that all the people were beginning to cast my way aroused my
original anxieties once more. If the sight of a hundred tatters
fluttering about me, like so many little ragamuffins dancing a
jig, attracted the stares of some idler, I became afraid that he
could read on my brow that I was an escaped prisoner. If a
passer-by brought his hand out from under his cloak, I
imagined him to be a sergeant reaching out his hand to arrest
me. If I noticed another striding along the pavement without
looking my way, I would persuade myself that he was pretending not to have seen me, in order to seize me from behind.
If I noticed a merchant going into his shop, I would say: ‘He
is going to take down his halberd!’ If I came across a district
more crowded with people than usual, I would think: ‘So
many people cannot be assembled here without some plan.’
If another was deserted: ‘Here, they are ready to ambush me.’
If congested traffic impeded my flight: “They have barricaded
the streets to shut me in.’

At length my fear undermined my reason. Every man
seemed to be a constable; every word, ‘Halt!’ and every sound
the intolerable creaking of the bolts of my late prison. Agitated as I was by this panic terror, I resolved to start begging
again, so as to cross the rest of the town as far as the Post without arousing suspicion. But for fear of being detected by my
voice, I supplemented the activities of a mendicant with the
subterfuge of counterfeiting dumbness. Now if I notice
people looking at me I go up to them. I point with my finger
under my chin and then at my mouth, and I open it wide with
an inarticulate cry, in order to convey, by my grimacing, that
a poor, dumb man is asking for alms. Sometimes, out of pure
charity, I would be donated a shrug of sympathy. Sometimes
I heard women murmuring that I might well have been
martyred like this in Turkey, for the Faith. In short, I learned
that beggary is a vast book, which can teach us about the
manners of peoples much more cheaply than all those great
voyages of Columbus and Magellan. oh

This stratagem, however, still failed to exhaust the stub-
