just verified it myself to some extent, but I must admit that,
being unable to debrutalize myself as quickly as this, I should
still be glad to feel a solid morsel between my teeth.’

He promised me that I should, but only on the following
day, for the reason, he said, that to eat so soon after a meal
would give me indigestion. We conversed for some time more
and then went up to our rooms to rest. At the top of the stairs
a man introduced himself to us and, after staring at us attentively, led me into a chamber where the floor was covered with
orange blossom to a depth of three feet, and my demon into
another filled with carnations and jasmine. Seeing how surprised I looked at this magnificence, he told me that these
were the beds of the country. Finally we lay down, each in our
own cell. When I was stretched out upon my flowers I saw by
the light of thirty large glow-worms enclosed in a glass (for
they use no other kind of candles), the three or four young
boys who had undressed me at supper. One of them began to
tickle my feet, another my thighs, another my sides, another
my arms—and all with so many caresses and with such a delicate touch that in less than a moment I felt myself dozing off.

Next day I saw my demon coming in with the first rays of
the sun. ‘Now I want to keep my word to you,’ he told me.
“You will breakfast more solidly than you supped yesterday.’

At these words I got up and he led me by the hand behind
the garden of the hostelry, where one of the host’s children
was waiting with a weapon in his hand almost like one of our
guns. He asked my guide if I wanted a dozen larks, because
barbary apes (he took me for one) feed upon this meat.
Hardly had I replied that I did when the hunter fired a shot
and twenty or thirty larks fell at our feet, ready roasted.

‘This,’ I thought to myself, ‘is what they mean by that
proverb in our world about a land where the larks fall ready
roasted.’ Doubtless someone had returned from here.

‘All you have to do is eat,’ said my demon. “They are diligent enough here to mix a certain compound with their
powder and shot which kills, plucks, roasts, and seasons the
game.’

