sides and wrote (either for money, or to spite Scarron and the
rest) his letter, Contre les Frondeurs, an attack on the princes
of the Fronde. Meanwhile L’Autre Monde (or at any rate the
first book of it) was completed. He sent the manuscript of it
to his friend, the poet Jean Royer de Prades, who expressed
in verse his alarm and his intention of avoiding Cyrano in
future:

Car autant qu’une affreuse mort
Je crains les gens de ‘L’Autre Monde’.

(I fear these people of ‘The Other World’ as greatly as a
dreadful death.) The reaction of other friends is unknown.
‘The manuscript remained unpublished, though its private
circulation probably added to his reputation both as a writer
and as a dangerous /ibertin (i.e. a free-thinker).

In 1652 he overcame any earlier scruples, driven perhaps
both by poverty and by the need for respectability, which
would permit him to publish, and obtained the patronage of
the dull and vain Duc d’Arpajon. His tragedy, La Mort
d’Agrippine, was published with a dedication to his new
patron and this was followed by a second volume of works,
including Le Pédant Joué. L’Autre Monde remained unpublished, but the audience which witnessed the first performance
of La Mort d’Agrippine at the Hotel de Bourgogne evidently
came prepared to be shocked by the work of a madman or an
atheist or both. Bold tirades against the gods (‘which were
made by man and did not make man’) may have passed unnoticed but a harmless phrase was taken as an insult to the
Eucharist (hostie can mean both victim and the Host) and an
uproar ensued. The play was taken off and the duke sought
to rid himself of his embarrassing protégé.

But by this time, fate (or as some biographers have had it,
the agents of the Holy Office) had intervened and caused a
wooden beam to fall on Cyrano’s head as he entered the
duke’s house. He was now ill and confined to his room. The
duke advised him to go to the country. Feeling betrayed,
Cyrano left the duke’s house for good, and was tended by his
