good-natured, they never drive anyone to run the risk of so
cruel a death, in order to take revenge.

“The reigning one at present is a dove, who is so peaceable
by nature that the other day, when two sparrows had to be
reconciled, we had all the trouble in the world to make him
understand what enmity was.’

My magpie could not carry on a conversation for so long
without some of those present taking note of it and, as it was
already suspected of some intelligence, the principals of the
assembly gave the order for it to be put under arrest by an
eagle of the guard, which secured its person. Meanwhile King
Dove arrived. Everyone fell silent and the first thing which
broke the silence was the accusation made by the Birds’
Public Prosecutor against the magpie.

When the King was fully informed of the scandal it had
caused, he asked its name and how it knew me. ‘Sire,’ it replied, greatly surprised, ‘I am called Margot. ‘There are many
birds of quality here who will answer for me. One day in the
world of the earth, of which I am a native, I learned from
Chirp the Snuffler here (who heard me crying in a cage and
came to visit me at the window where I was hanging) that my
father was Shorttail and my mother Crunchnut. But for him
I should never have known, for I had been stolen from under
my parents’ wing in my nest at a very early age. My mother
died of grief a short time afterwards and my father, who was
then past an age to beget more children, despaired at seeing
himself without heirs and went off to the Wars of the Jays,
where he was killed by a peck in the brains.

‘Those who carried me off were certain wild animals known
as swineherds, which took me to be sold at a castle, where I
saw this man who you are now trying. I do not know if he conceived some affection for me, but he took the trouble to
instruct the servants to chop up my food and sometimes had
the goodness to prepare it for me himself. If I was chilled in
winter, he would take me near the fire, wrap up my cage or
tell the gardener to warm me in his shirt. In his presence the
servants did not dare to tease me and I remember the day

