have trapped their light and enclosed it in these transparent
balls which I have here. This should give you no great cause
for amazement since it is just as easy for me, a native of the
sun, to bottle its rays, which are the dust of that world, as it is
for you to gather up the dust or atoms which are the pulverized earth of this one.’

Our host then dispatched a servant to escort the philosophers, because it was dark, with a dozen globes of worms
suspended from his four legs. As for the rest of us (to wit, my
preceptor and myself), we went to bed according to the
physiognomist’s orders. This time he put me in a chamber of
violets and lilies and sent them to tickle me as usual. At nine
the following day I saw my demon coming in and he told me

he had come from the palace, where ==aGpac™, one of the

Queen’s ladies-in-waiting, had begged him to go and visit her.
She had inquired after me, vowing that she still firmly intended to keep the promise she had given me, namely that she
would cheerfully follow me if I would take her with me to the
other world.

‘What greatly edified me,’ he continued, ‘was to learn that
the principal motive for her journey was to become a Christian. I therefore gave my word to assist her scheme to
the extent of my powers and for this purpose to invent a
machine capable of holding three or four persons, in which
you can travel up there together this very day. I am going to
apply myself seriously to the execution of this undertaking
and so for your entertainment, while I am not with you, here
is a book, which I will leave with you. I brought it back from
my native land long ago. It is entitled: The States and
Empires of the Sun, together with the History of the Spark.
I am giving you this one besides, which I regard much more
highly. It is The Great Works of the Philosophers composed
by one of the best brains upon the sun. In it he proves that all
things are true and states how the truths of all contradictions
may be reconciled physically, such as for example that white
