is black and black is white; that one can be and not be at the
same time; that there can be hills without valleys; that
nothingness is something and that everything, which is, is not.
But take note that he proves all these unheard-of paradoxes
without any fallacious or sophistical reasoning.

‘When you are tired of reading, you can take a walk or converse with our host’s son. His wit is quite delightful: what displeases me in him is his impiety. If he should chance to
scandalize you or to undermine your faith with any of his
arguments, you must not fail to come and put it to me at once
and I will resolve the difficulties for you. Anyone else would
order you to leave his company, when he desires to philosophize on such matters, but as he is extremely vain I am
certain that he would take your flight for defeat and begin to
imagine that our beliefs were not founded upon good reasons
if you refused to listen to his. Reflect how you may live
freely!’

With these words he left me, for in that country they are the
valediction with which one takes leave of someone, just as
‘good day’ or ‘your servant, Sir,’ is expressed by this compliment: ‘Love me, sage, for I love you.’ But he was hardly gone
before I began to examine my books attentively, as well as
their boxes, that is to say their covers, which seemed to me
admirable in their richness. One was carved out of a single
diamond, which was more brilliant beyond compare than any
of ours. The second appeared to be nothing but a monstrous
pearl split in two. My demon had translated the books into
the language of that world, but since I have none of their
print I am simply going to explain what these two volumes
were like.

On opening a box, I discovered in it a metal object, not
unlike one of our clocks, which was filled with all manner of
tiny springs and mysterious machines. It was a book indeed,
but a miraculous book, with neither pages nor letters: it was,
in short, a book where the eyes were useless for reading and
for which only the ears were needed. When someone desires to
‘read,’ he winds up this machine with a great quantity of little
