mirrors attracted no more air, for there was no longer any
vacuum being created. The air no longer became a wind
rushing in to fill it. The wind ceased to propel my box
upwards. In short, immediately after this wreck, I saw it
falling for a very long time through the vast zones of the universe. It recovered its shadowy opacity in the region where it
had breathed it out. The energetic virtue of the light ceases to
take effect in that locality and so my box avidly resumed its
obscure density, which seemed as if it was essential to it, just
as spirits have been seen coming in search of their bodies and
wandering round their tombs for a hundred years, trying to
rejoin them. I suppose that this is how it lost its diaphanousness, for I have since seen it in Poland in the same state as it
was in when I climbed into it for the first time. I later discovered that it fell below the equinoctial line in the kingdom of
Borneo. A Portuguese merchant bought it from the Islander
who found it and it passed from hand to hand until it came
into the possession of the Polish engineer who now uses it for
flying.

Suspended thus in the wastes of the heavens and already
thrown into consternation by the prospect of falling to my
death, I lifted up my eyes sadly towards the sun, as I have told
you. My vision carried my thoughts there and my gaze, firmly
fixed on its globe, marked out a path, whose traces my will
could follow in order to carry my body up to it.

This vigorous upsurge of my soul will not be incomprehensible to anyone who considers the most simple effects of our
will power. It is common knowledge that when I wish to jump
in the air, my will, aroused by my imagination, stirs up the
whole microcosm of my body and strives to carry it up towards the goal it has set itself. If it does not always reach it;
this is because the principles in nature which are universal
prevail over those which are restricted. Since the power of the ,
will is confined to sentient beings, while the impulse to fall
towards the earth’s centre is distributed throughout all
matter, my leap is halted just as I am drawing near to my
