lofty virtue, I was afraid that it would go unrecognized. That
is why I tried to make him accept three phials: the first one
was filled with oil of talc, the next with powder of projection,
and the last with potable gold, in other words, the vital essence
from which your chemists promise eternal life. But he refused
them with a scorn more noble than that with which Diogenes
received Alexander’s compliments, when he came to visit him
in his barrel. I can add nothing, finally, to my eulogy of this
man, save that he is the only poet, the only philosopher, and
the only free man among you. These are the people with
whom I conversed who are worthy of note. All the rest, at
least of those I knew, are so sub-human that I have seen beasts
somewhat superior to them.

‘I should add that I am not a native of your earth at all, nor
of this one: I was born in the sun. But because our world
sometimes becomes over-populated, on account of the longevity of its inhabitants and the almost total lack of wars and
diseases, from time to time the magistrates send out colonists
into the neighbouring worlds. As for myself, I was ordered to
go to yours and proclaimed leader of the population they sent
with me. I have since then moved to this one for the reasons I
gave you; and what induces me to stay here at the moment is
the fact that men here are lovers of truth. There is not a
pedant to be seen. Philosophers only permit themselves to be
convinced by reason and neither the authority of a scholar,
nor that of the majority can outweigh the opinion of a
thresher on the farm, when his arguments are as good as
theirs. In this country, briefly, only logic-choppers and tubthumpers are reckoned to be mad.’

I asked him how long his kind lived. He told me three or
four thousand years and continued in this way: ‘In order to
make myself visible, as I am at present, when I feel that the
carcass I inhabit is almost worn out or that the organs are no
longer performing their functions perfectly enough, I breathe
myself into a young body recently dead.

‘Although the inhabitants of the sun are less numerous
than those of this world, the sun is often overcrowded with
