you theirs, because it is nature’s own medium of communication with all the animals.

‘You should no longer be surprised at the ease with which
you can grasp the sense of a tongue that has never sounded
in your ears before. When I speak, your soul recognizes in
each one of my words that truth for which it blindly gropes,
and though your reason does not understand it, you have
natural instincts which cannot fail to do so.’

‘Aha! Then it is, without a doubt,’ I exclaimed, ‘the energetic idiom by means of which our first father once conversed
with and was understood by the animals. He was given
dominion over all species and they obeyed him, because he
commanded them in a language they knew. This is also why
(the original language being lost) they do not now come when
we call them, as they used to, because they no longer understand us.’

The little man did not appear to wish to answer me and,
taking up the thread of his own discourse once more, he
would have continued—if I had not once more interrupted
him. I asked him what world it was whose air we were breathing, if it was greatly populated, and what kind of government
kept order there.

‘I am going,’ he replied, ‘to unfold secrets to you, which are
quite unknown in the clime you come from.

‘Take a good look at the earth we are walking on. Until a
short while ago it was an undigested and formless mass, a
chaos of confused matter, a sticky black impurity expelled by
the sun. After the vigour of the sun’s rays beating down upon
it had blended, compressed, and made compact the clouds of
countless atoms, when, I say, the most dissimilar bodies in
this globe had been separated and the most similar united, in
the course of a long and powerful coction, its overheated body
sweated so much that it caused a flood, which covered it for
more than forty days. For the great quantity of water required
all this space of time to run away down the slopes to the lowest
regions of our globe.

‘From these amalgamated torrents of moisture was formed

