diversely, each according to its shape. Now if you take a
round ivory ball and place it upon a very flat surface, at the
slightest touch you give it, it will roll for seven minutes without stopping: and let me add that if it were as perfectly round
as some of these atoms I am speaking of, and the surface on
which it was placed were completely flat, it would never stop.
If art, therefore, is capable of making a body inclined to perpetual motion, why should we not believe that nature can do
it? It is the same with the other shapes: ones like the square
seek a state of perpetual repose, others a sideways motion,
others quiver in a partial movement: and when one of the
round ones, whose essence is to move, comes into conjunction
with one of the pyramidal ones, it may well be that they
produce what we call “fire”, because fire not only moves restlessly, it also pierces and penetrates easily. Apart from this,
the flame behaves differently, according to the type and size of
the angles made between the pyramid and the sphere: so the
flame produced by pepper, for example, is quite a different
thing from a sugar flame: sugar produces a different one from
cinnamon, cinnamon from cloves, and this last differs from
the flame of a burning faggot.

‘It is fire, the builder and designer of both the parts and the
whole of the universe, which has drawn together and
assembled in this oak tree the quantity of shapes needed to
compose it. “But,” you will say to me, “how can all the
elements needed to produce this oak tree be gathered together
in one place by chance?” My reply to you is that it isno marvel
for the matter thus arranged to have formed an oak tree,
although it would have been a great marvel if the matter were
arranged thus and an oak tree had not been produced. A few
less of some shapes and it would have been an elm, a poplar or
a willow. A few less of certain others and it would have been a
mimosa pudica, an oyster in its shell, a worm, a fly, a frog, a
sparrow, an ape, a man. When you throw three dices upon
a table and a triple two comes up, or three, four, and five, or
two sixes and a one, you will say: “Oh, what a miracle! The
same number has come up on all the dice, although so many

