Swiftian. But he rightly defends Cyrano against the irrelevant
charge of plagiarism. Again the nineteenth century had misunderstood Cyrano’s originality: it was not that of the scientist
or philosopher. It was that of a poet who listened to their talk
and used it for his own ends. The value of this has been
perceived more recently.

The revival of interest in Cyrano during the past ten years
may perhaps be related to that in a more modern fantastic
writer, Alfred Jarry (also a rebellious schoolboy who pilloried
his teacher in a play, who mated a passion for physics with a
belief in the paramountcy of the imagination to produce
‘pataphysics’, his science of impossible solutions, and who
made L’Autre Monde one of the twenty-seven ‘equivalent
books’ of his own voyager through space-time, Dr Faustroll).
Our age has outgrown the sweetly reasonable straitjacket of
classicism and the heroic individualism of the romantics.
Cyrano can speak to us directly now as a voice from an age of
fragmented culture, like our own, in which there are many
authorities demanding subservience but no one Authority; in
which the physical world is seen to be governed by huge forces
we observe at work but cannot quite fathom; and in which
solid matter melts away into infinitesimal particles as we try
to define it.

Cyrano de Bergerac was an accomplished writer in at least
three standard genres of his time. His letters show elegance,
wit, pungent rhetoric, and a feeling for nature. His comedy
shows Rabelaisian verve, with its larger-than-life characters
and satire on pedantry. It contains many sallies at the expense
of the literary rules of classicism, including those of comedy.
(I should have riddled this rogue’s belly with holes already,
but I was afraid of breaking the rules of comedy by spilling
blood upon the stage.’) His tragedy, however, shows considerable formal discipline and Cornelian eloquence. It was only
in L’Autre Monde that Cyrano found a genre which gave full
scope to his gifts and to the diversity of his experience. He
did not invent the genre but rather developed it from an
