the impulses of her desire, it moved its own matter so powerfully that it constructed for itself much more powerful
organs, ones capable of putting her thoughts into action and
fully sublimating her love to its most virile extent. That is to
say, Iphis became what it is necessary to be in order to marry
a woman.

‘I should call this occurrence a miracle if I had another
name left for the event which follows.

‘A young and greatly gifted man called Narcissus had won,
by his love, the affection of an extremely beautiful girl whom
the poets have celebrated under the name of Echo. But
women, as you know, more than our sex, are never satisfied
with the way they are loved. Having heard the virtues of the
apples of Orestes being praised, she succeeded in obtaining
some from several places. And because she was afraid, since
love is always still apprehensive, that those of one tree
might be weaker than those of another, she wanted him to
taste two of them. But no sooner had he eaten them than the
picture of Echo was effaced from his memory—all his love
was directed towards the one who had eaten the fruit: he was
both lover and beloved; for the substance drawn from the
apple of Pylades embraced in him that of the apple of Orestes.
This twin fruit, distributed throughout the whole mass of his
body, aroused all the parts of his body to caress one another.
His heart, into which their double virtue flowed, directed its
warmth inwards, towards itself. All his limbs, animated with
his passion, sought to penetrate one another. Even his reflection, burning with passion amidst the cold of the pools, drew
his body close that they might be united. In short poor Narcissus became hopelessly in love with himself.

‘I will not bore you by relating the sad end that befell him.
The past ages have spoken of it enough. But I have two more
adventures to relate to you which will take up the time better.

‘You must know that the fair Salmacis was acquainted with
the shepherd Hermaphroditus, but on no more familiar
terms than the proximity of their houses would permit. ‘Then
fortune, who delights in upsetting the most untroubled lives,
