objection. I have told you that with the sun beating hard
upon my concave mirrors, which focused all its rays together
in the middle of the vessel, the air which filled it was driven
by the heat through the pipe in the top and that thus a
vacuum was left in the vessel. Nature, which abhors this,
made it suck in more air through the lower opening, in order
to refill itself. If it lost a lot of air, it recovered as much. So
you ought not to be amazed that I should have continued to
soar in a region above the middle one, where the winds are,
because the upper air was turned into a wind by the furious
speed at which it rushed in to prevent the vacuum forming
and was consequently forced to drive my machine upwards
without stopping.

I was scarcely troubled by hunger at all, except when I was
crossing the middle region, for actually the coldness of the
climate did give me a distant glimpse of it. I say ‘distant’
because the bottle of cordial essence which I always carried
and from which I took several draughts, helped me to keep
it at bay.

During the whole of the rest of my journey I felt no pangs
at all. On the contrary, the more progress I made towards this
blazing world, the more robust I felt. I felt my face grow a
little warm and brighter than usual. My hands appeared
tinged with an agreeable ruddiness and an indefinable joy
flowed in my very blood, which made me feel quite elated.

I remember that once when I was pondering about this
phenomenon I reasoned in this way: ‘Doubtless, hunger
could not assail me, because this pain is but an instinct of
nature, which she uses to induce animals to replace with food
what they have lost from their substance. But today she senses
that the pure, uninterrupted, and proximate radiation from
the sun is making me supplement my bodily heat faster than
I am losing it and so she no longer gives me this appetite,
which would be useless to me.’

To this argument, however, I found the objection that,
since the constitution which makes life is composed not
only of natural heat, but also of radical moisture—to which
