motion from its shape. But why should you suppose the sky to
be round, since you cannot know for sure? And if, out of all
the possible shapes, it does not happen to possess this one, it is
certain that it cannot move.

‘I am not going to reproach you for your eccentrics, your
concentrics, and your epicycles, all of which you could only
explain very confusedly and from which I have rescued my
own system. Let us simply discuss the natural causes of this
motion. You are all forced to fall back on intelligences which
move and govern your spheres. But I, on the other hand, do
not disturb the repose of the Supreme Being, who doubtless
created nature all perfect, and who is wise enough to have
accomplished the task in such a way that, having made it complete in one respect, He did not leave it defective in another.
I, I tell you, find in the earth itself the virtues which make it
move. I maintain that the rays and influences of the sun fall
upon it as they circulate and make it revolve (just as we make
a globe revolve by striking it with our hands); or equally that
the vapours continually evaporating from its heart on the
side visible to the sun are repelled by the cold of the middle
region of the air and fall back upon it, and, of necessity only
being able to strike at an angle, thus make it pirouette.

“The explanation of the other two motions is even less complicated. Pray you, consider a little....’

At these words the Viceroy interrupted me: ‘I would
prefer,’ he said, ‘to spare you the trouble, since I have read
several books by Gassendi on this subject, but on condition
that you listen to the reply given me one day by one of our
Fathers who was upholding your opinion. “Indeed,” he said,
“T am convinced that the earth revolves, not for the reasons
alleged by Copernicus, but because the fires of hell, as the
Holy Scriptures tell us, are enclosed in the centre of the earth
and the damned, seeking to escape the burning flames,
clamber up the vault in order to avoid them and thus cause
the earth to revolve, as a dog turns a wheel when it runs
enclosed within it.” ’

We spent some time praising this notion as a pure fruit of
