taken before the Tribunal of the Birds. The only lawyers,
counsellors, and judges at this session were magpies, jays, and
starlings; furthermore they had only selected those that
understood my language.

Instead of putting me in the dock for interrogation, they set
me astride a stump of rotten wood. After clacking with his
beak two or three times and shaking his feathers majestically,
the one presiding over the hearing asked me where I came
from, my nation, and my species. My charitable magpie had
given me some instructions beforehand, which were very
salutary to me—among them, that I should be careful to
refrain from admitting that I was a man. I therefore replied
that I came from that small world known as the earth, about
which they might have heard from the phoenix and several
others, whom I saw in the assembly. The climate that had
witnessed my birth was situated below the temperate zone of
the northern hemisphere in an extremity of Europe called
France. As for my species, I was not a man at all, as they
imagined, but an ape. Some men had stolen me from my
cradle when I was very young and brought me up among
themselves. ‘The bad education they gave me had made my
skin delicate and they had made me forget my native language
and taught me theirs. In order to please these wild animals, I
had become accustomed to walking on two legs only and
finally, as it is easier to be degraded in species than to rise, the
opinions, customs, and food of these horrible beasts had
gained such a hold over me that my family, who were apes of
the best class, would scarcely recognize me themselves. In
justification of myself I added that they should have me
examined by experts, and that in the event of my being found
to be a man, I would submit to being annihilated as a
monster.

‘Gentlemen,’ cried a swallow from the assembly, as soon as
I had finished speaking, ‘you will not have forgotten that it
has just said that the country which witnessed its birth was
France. But you know that apes do not breed in France.
Judge now whether it is what it pretends to be!’
