all that had befallen me since the devil had become our
chariot, was driven right out of my mind by the terror now
inspired in me by the sight of a mountain in flames, almost
near enough to touch. The spectacle of this fiery object made
me cry out: ‘Jesu Maria!’

Hardly had I uttered the last syllable, when I found myself
stretched out on the heather at the top of a small hill, with
two or three shepherds round me, reciting litanies and
addressing me in Italian.

‘Oh!’ I cried. ‘God be praised! At last I have found
Christians in the world of the moon. Pray tell me, my friends,
what province of your world am I in now?’

‘In Italy,’ they replied.

‘How?’ I broke in. ‘Is there also an Italy in the world of the
moon?’ For I had as yet given the incident so little thought
that I had not noticed that they were speaking to me in
Italian and I was answering them in the same language.

When, accordingly, I was completely disabused and
nothing else stood in the way of my realizing that I had
returned to this world, I allowed myself to be led where the
peasants chose to take me. But before I had got as far as the
gates of , all the dogs in the town came and flung themselves upon me and if fear had not driven me into a house,
where I put up a barricade between myself and them, I would
undoubtedly have been devoured.

Within a quarter of an hour, as I rested in this dwelling,
there was such a sabbath to be heard all round that I believe
all the dogs in the kingdom had joined in. From mastiff to
lap-dog, one could see them there, howling with a fury so
appalling that they might have been celebrating the memory
of their first Adam.

This occurrence caused all the people who saw it no little
amazement, but as soon as I had roused myself to reflect on
the subject, I at once concluded that these animals were
raging at me on account of the world I had come from. ‘For,’
I said to myself, ‘that as they are in the habit of barking at the
moon because of the pain it causes them from afar, doubtless
