it should give way in one place rather than another. We all
piled into the basket and hauled ourselves right up to the top
of the bird’s throat, where we looked like no more than a bell
hung about its neck. When we were hard against the pulley,
we belayed the cable, from which our cage was hung, round
one of the finest of its down feathers (which was, nevertheless,
as thick as my thumb) and as soon as the woman made
a signal to the bird to start, we felt ourselves cleaving the air
with great force. The condor reduced or increased speed and
went up or down as its mistress desired, her voice acting as a
bridle. We had not flown two hundred leagues when over to
our left we saw a night covering the ground, which resembled
the one cast beneath it by our own living parasol. We asked
the fair stranger what she thought it could be.

‘It is another criminal, who is also going to be judged in the
province we are bound for. His bird must be stronger than
ours, or else we had dallied a great deal, for he did not leave
until after me.’

I asked her what crime this unfortunate man was accused
of.

‘He is not merely accused,’ she replied to us, ‘he is condemned to death, because he has already been convicted of
not being afraid to die.’

‘How so?’ said Campanella. ‘Do the laws of your country
command you to fear death?’

‘Yes,’ answered the woman. “They command everyone to do
so, except for those who have been admitted to the College of
Sages. For our magistrates have discovered from painful
experience that a man who is not afraid of losing his own life
is capable of taking everyone else’s.’

After some further exchanges which followed from these,
Campanella sought to inform himself in more detail about
the way of life of her country. He therefore asked her what
the laws and customs of the Kingdom of Lovers were; but she
excused herself from speaking about them, for the reason
that, not having been born there and only half knowing them
she was afraid of saying too little or too much about them.
