people as Francois Tristan L’Hermite, the playwright. He
frequented taverns and indulged in gambling, a pastime his
father’s fortunes could ill afford. He probably also read
widely and voraciously. Henri Le Bret remained his friend
and adviser and something of a mediator between Cyrano
and his father. It was on Le Bret’s suggestion that he enlisted
with M. de Carbon de Casteljaloux’ company of guards, his
admission being facilitated by the noble and Gascon ring of
his new name, for both qualifications were required in this
company. He was apparently soon involved in many duels
and acquitted himself well. He is said to have fought only as
a second (the normal custom for seconds then) and never in
his own quarrels. He received a musket shot through the body
at the siege of Mouzon in Champagne in the bitter winter of
1639, and the following year he was again wounded, this time
at Arras and in the throat. Soon after this he abandoned his
military career, with a weakened constitution but having won
considerable respect from his brother officers.

In 1641 he returned to a life of study at the Collége de
Lisieux, perhaps earning his keep as an usher. He attended
the classes of Gassendi, the Epicurean philosopher, mathematician and free-thinker, newly arrived in Paris. His pupils
included brilliant young men of Cyrano’s generation like
Moliére and Jacques Rohault, the disciple of Descartes, who
was to remain a close friend of Cyrano and to guide him in
his study of physics.

A number of stories are told about his exploits at this
period. Those told by Le Bret (which include routing a band
of a hundred hired ruffians in order to protect the poet
Ligniéres) do him credit. Others indicate a preposterously
vain and ill-tempered disposition and belong to the burlesque
legend built up by less loyal friends, such as the poet Charles
Dassoucy, with whom at times he quarrelled. It seems certain
that Cyrano mixed intelligent conversation and studies with
a fairly dissolute way of life, during which he gambled with
Tristan L’Hermite, contracted syphilis, which was never
properly cured, helped to impoverish his father, broadened
