matter which sustains them, they will scatter in every direction, you need have no doubt, in search of fresh nourishment,
and they will attach themselves to all the worlds they formerly
created, particularly the nearest to hand. And so these great
fires will mix all the bodies up together again and then drive
them out everywhere pell-mell, as before, and, having little by
little purified themselves, they will begin to serve as suns for
other little worlds, which they engender by expelling them
out of their own spheres.

‘And that is doubtless what made the Pythagoreans predict
universal conflagration. This is not a ridiculous fancy: New
France, where we are, provides a convincing example of it.
This vast continent of America forms a half of the earth
which, despite our ancestors having sailed the ocean a
thousand times, had never been discovered. It is evident that
it was not yet there; nor were many of the islands, peninsulas, and mountains which have since appeared on our
globe, when the dross from the sun, as it purged itself, was
driven far enough and condensed in clusters heavy enough to
be attracted by the centre of our earth—possibly little by
little, in tiny particles, perhaps all at once in a mass. This
theory is not so unreasonable that Saint Augustin would not
have applauded it, if the discovery of this continent had been
made in his time, for this great man, whose genius was enlightened by the Holy Spirit, affirms that in his time the earth
was as flat as a pancake and floated upon the water like half a
sliced orange.

‘But if ever I have the honour of seeing you in France, I will
show you, with the aid of an excellent spy-glass, that certain
obscurities, which look like spots from here, are worlds in
formation.’

My eyes were closing as I finished this speech and the Viceroy was obliged to leave me. On the next day and the days
following we had conversations of a similar nature. But when
some time later the pressure of the affairs of the province
called a halt to our philosophizing, I returned even more
eagerly to my intention of ascending to the moon.

