being more attentive to their grimaces and their sounds than
my male, but I learned quicker than he to understand their
language and to murder it a little, which made them consider
us in quite a different way from before.

‘The news at once ran through the kingdom that two wild
men had been found, smaller than the rest of them (on
account of the poor nourishment we had taken in our isolated
state) and, thanks to a failing in their fathers’ seed, with front
legs too weak to carry their own weight.

This belief would have spread and taken root, if the priests
of the country had not made a stand against it, saying that it
was shocking impiety to believe that not merely beasts, but
monsters could belong to their species. ‘Even our domestic
animals,’ added the more dispassionate of them, ‘would be
much more likely to share in humanity’s privilege of immortality—for they are born in our country—than a monstrous
beast that says it was born heaven knows where in the moon.
And then consider the visible difference between us and
them: we walk upon four feet, because God would not entrust
something so precious to a less secure posture. He was afraid
of some misfortune befalling man if he walked in any other
way: that is why He took the trouble to set him upon four
columns, so that he could not fall. But, scorning to interfere
with the construction of these two brutes, He abandoned
them to the whim of Nature, who had no fears about the loss
of something so trivial, and placed them upon two paws only.

‘Not even the birds,’ they said, ‘have been so ill used as
these. At least they have been given feathers to compensate
for the feebleness of their legs, so that they can launch themselves into the air when we drive them from our houses; while
nature, in taking away two of these monsters’ feet has rendered them incapable of flight from our justice.

‘And apart from this, just take a look at how they have their
heads turned towards heaven! It is the paucity of God’s gifts
to them which makes them stand in this way. Their suppliant
attitude shows that they are complaining to heaven about
their Maker and begging leave to be fitted out with what is
