threads of all kinds, then he turns the needle to the chapter he
wishes to hear and at once there issue from it, as from the
mouth of a man or from a musical instrument, all the distinct
and different sounds which the great lunarians employ for the
expression of their language.

When I have later reflected upon this miraculous invention
for making books, I am no longer astonished to see how the
young men in that country possessed more understanding at
sixteen or eighteen than the greybeards do in ours, since,
knowing how to read as soon as they can talk, they are never
without reading matter. In their room, on a walk, in town, or
on a journey they can carry some thirty of these books in their
pockets or slung from their belts. They have only to wind upa
spring in order to hear a single chapter, or several, indeed, if
they are in a mood to listen to a whole book. ‘hus you can
have all the great men, both dead and alive, perpetually
about you, to address you viva voce.

This gift occupied me more than an hour. Finally, having
attached them to myself in the form of ear pendants, I went
out for a walk, but as soon as I had reached the end of the
road, I met quite a large company of sorrowful people. Four
of them were carrying a kind of coffin on their shoulders,
draped in black. I enquired from a bystander the significance
of this procession, so like the funeral ceremonies of my own

country. He replied that the wicked [a — , whose name

in the common people’s jargon was a fillip of the finger on the
right knee, who had been convicted of envy and ingratitude,
had deceased the day before and that Parliament had condemned him more than twenty years previously to die a
natural death in his bed and then be buried after death.

I began to laugh at this reply and when he asked me why, I
said: ‘You astonish me by saying that what are marks of
blessedness in our world, such as a long life, a peaceful death
and an honourable burial, should serve in this one as an
exemplary punishment.’
