getting to know all the regions of that great world, he replied
that his impatience to see one of his friends, who had recently
arrived, compelled him to cut short his travels. I recognized,
from the words that followed, that this friend was the famous
philosopher of our time, Monsieur Descartes,! and that he was
hastening for no other reason than to join him.

When I asked him, further, in what esteem he held the
latter’s Physics, he answered that it should be read with no
less respect than that which the pronouncements of oracles
are heard. ‘Not that the natural sciences have no need, like
the other sciences, to be examined critically for axioms they
do not prove;’ he added, ‘but the principles of his are so
simple and so natural that once they are supposed, there is no
other system which fits all the evidence better.’

At this point I could not keep myself from interrupting
him. ‘But it seems to me,’ I said, ‘that this philosopher always
denied the existence of vacuums. Yet, although he was an
Epicurean, in order to have the honour of upholding the
principles of Epicurus, that is to say of atoms, he established
that the beginning of things was a chaos of completely solid
matter which God divided up into an untold number of little
squares, each of which He imbued with conflicting motions.
Now he has it that these cubes rubbed against one another
and so ground each other into particles of all kinds of shapes.
But how can he reckon that these square pieces should have
begun to turn separately, without admitting that a vacuum
was formed between their corners? Would it not be bound to
occur in the spaces left by the corners of these squares as they
moved? Could these squares, which occupied a certain area
before turning, have revolved in a circle if they had not taken
up twice as much space when they spun? Geometricians teach
us that such a thing is impossible. Therefore half of all this
space must of necessity have been left empty, since there were
no atoms yet in existence to fill it.’

My philosopher replied to me that Monsieur Descartes

1 Descartes died on 11 February 1650.
