precious tree which you encountered on your road and whose
shape we have just abandoned. For the rest, now that I see this
little bird resolved to return to its country, we are going, my
subjects and I, to resume both our shape and the direction of
our journey.

‘But it is reasonable to reveal to you first who we are,
namely animals born and bred in the brilliant part of the
sun—for there is an extremely marked difference between the
peoples which the luminous region produces and the peoples
of the opaque country. It is us whom you in the world of the
earth call “spirits,” and your presumptuous stupidity has
given us this name, because, not being able to imagine
animals more perfect than man and seeing certain beings
which do things beyond human power, you have presumed
these animals to be spirits. You are nevertheless mistaken: we
are animals like you. For although, when we choose, we can
give our substance the essential appearance and shape of anything we want to turn into, as you have just seen, this does not
prove that we are spirits.

‘But listen, and I will explain how all these metamorphoses, which seem to you to be so many miracles, are nothing
but simple natural phenomena. You must know that being
inhabitants of the pellucid part of this great world, where the
principle of matter is to be in action, we are bound to have
much more active imaginations than those of the opaque
regions, and bodies composed of a much more fluid substance.

‘Once one supposes this, it inevitably follows that our
imagination, encountering no resistance in the matter of
which we are composed, can arrange it at will, and, having
become the complete master of our bodies, manceuvres them,
by moving all their particles, into the arrangements necessary
to constitute the objects it has pictured in miniature. Thus
each one of us imagined the place and the part of this
precious tree into which he would change. By this effort of
imagination, we excited in our substance the movements
necessary to produce them and so changed ourselves into
them. ‘Thus my eagle, when his eyes were blinded, had only
