same encounters, it would have performed the same miracles.
It is just the same with this fire, which moves by itself. Where
it has met organs suited to the kind of vibration necessary for
reasoning, it has reasoned. Where it has found those suited
only to feeling, it has felt. Where it has found them suited for
vegetating, it has vegetated. Morevoer, if one puts out this
man’s eyes, which the fire of his soul causes to see, he will no
longer see, just as our great clock will cease to mark the hours
if you break the mechanism.

‘Lastly, these primary and indivisible atoms offer us a
wheel on which the most problematical difficulties of physics
will run smoothly. There is nothing, not even the operation
of the senses, which I cannot easily explain by means of these
little bodies. Let us begin with sight, which, as the most mysterious of them, is worthy of our first attempts.

“To my way of thinking, this occurs when the outer coats of
the eye, which have openings in them similar to those in glass,
send out the fire dust known as sight-rays and it is stopped by
some Opaque matter which makes it rebound back to its
home. On its way this dust meets the image of the object that
repulsed it, which consists of nothing but an infinite number
of tiny bodies continually and evenly given off by the subject
observed, and it drives them back to our eye. You are sure to
object to me that glass is an opaque body and very compact,
yet nevertheless, instead of repulsing the first little bodies, it
allows itself to be penetrated by them. But my answer to you
is that the pores in glass are the same shape as the atoms of fire
which pass through it: just as a wheat sieve is no good for
sifting oats, nor an oats sieve for sifting wheat. Similarly a
deal box, although it is thin and lets sounds through, is not
penetrable to sight; whereas a piece of crystal is transparent
and penetrable to sight, but one cannot touch things through
gs

I could not help interrupting him here. ‘A great poet and
philosopher of our world,’ I told him, ‘following Epicurus,
who followed Democritus, has spoken of these little bodies
