‘Now! now!’ said Campanella, pulling at my arm. ‘Any help we might think of giving this dying man would be useless and would only upset him. Let us go on, for his sickness is incurable. The swelling of his head is due to his having used his mind too much; for although the elements, with which he has filled the three organs or ventricles of his brain, are very tiny images, they are still corporeal and in consequence occupy a large space when they are very numerous. Now you must know that this philosopher swelled his brain so much, by dint of piling image upon image, that, not being able to contain them any longer, it has exploded. This way of dying is that of the great geniuses and it is called “bursting with intelligence”.’

We continued on our way, conversing all the time, and whatever came next to our eyes furnished us with matter for discussion. I should, in fact, have very much liked to leave the opaque regions of the sun and re-enter the luminous ones. For the reader will remember that the countries there are not all diaphanous: there are some which are shadowy, like those in our world, and which would be shrouded in darkness if it were not for the light of a sun which can be seen from there. As one gradually enters the opaque regions one becomes opaque oneself and, similarly, when one approaches the transparent ones, one feels oneself stripped of this dark obscurity by the vigorous irradiation of the climate.

I remember that, with regard to this burning desire of mine, I asked Campanella if the province of the philosophers was brilliant or shadowy.

‘It is more shadowy than brilliant,’ he replied, ‘for as we are still very much in sympathy with the earth, our native country, which is by nature opaque, we should not be comfortable in the most illuminated regions of this globe. We can, however, make ourselves diaphanous by means of a vigorous effort of will power, when the fancy takes us, and it is even true to say that the majority of the philosophers do not use their tongues for talking. When they wish to communicate their thoughts, their flights of imagination purge them of the sombre vapour, beneath which they generally keep their ideas hidden. As soon as they have driven back to its seat the dark spleen which obscured them, their bodies become diaphanous and one can see the things they remember, imagine, and judge in their brains, and the things they desire and resolve in their livers and their hearts. For although these little images are more imperceptible than anything else we can think of in this world, we have eyes sharp enough to make out even the very minor ideas with ease.

‘Thus, when one of us wishes to reveal to a friend the affection he bears him, one sees his heart directing rays at the image in his memory of the one he loves; and when, on the other hand, he wants to show his aversion, one sees his heart projecting eddies of burning sparks at the image of the person he hates and recoiling from it as much as it can. Similarly, when he is communing with himself, one can clearly observe the elements, that is to say, the images of each thing he contemplates, imprinting or projecting themselves and presenting to the eyes of the observer not an articulate speech, but the story of all his thoughts in pictures.’

My guide would have continued, but he was stopped by a hitherto unprecedented occurrence, which was that we suddenly observed the ground growing dark beneath our feet and the rays of light in the brilliant sky above our heads extinguished, as if a canopy four leagues wide had been unfurled between us and the sun.

I find it difficult to tell you what we imagined in this situation. All kinds of terrors assailed us, including that of the end of the world, and none of them seemed unlikely, because to see night on the sun, or the sky clouded, is a miracle that never happens there. This was not all, besides. Immediately afterwards a harsh creaking sound came to our ears, like the noise of a pulley turning rapidly, and at the same time we saw a cage falling at our feet. Hardly had it touched the sand when it opened and gave birth to a man and a woman. They were dragging an anchor, which they planted in the base of a rock. After this we saw them coming towards us. The woman was leading the man, pulling him along and threatening him. When she was quite close to us she spoke with some emotion in her voice. |

‘Gentlemen,’ she said, ‘is this not the Province of the
Philosophers?’

I replied that it was not, but that we hoped to arrive there within twenty-four hours and that the ancient who suffered

me to accompany him was one of the principal officers of that
realm.

‘Since you are a philosopher,’ replied the woman, addressing Campanella, ‘I must unburden my heart to you before I go any further.

‘To explain the matter that brings me here in a few words, you must know that I am coming to complain of a murder committed against the person of my youngest child. This barbarian, whom I have here, killed it twice over, although he was its father.’

We were extremely puzzled by this speech and asked to
know what she meant by a child killed twice over.

‘You must know that in our country,’ the woman replied, ‘there is, among the other Statutes of Love, a law which regulates the number of embraces a husband may give his wife. That is why every evening each doctor goes the rounds of all the houses in his area, where, after examining the husbands and wives, he will prescribe for them, according to their good or bad health, so many conjunctions for the night. Well, my husband had been put down for seven. However, angered by some rather haughty remarks I had addressed to him as we were getting ready to retire, he did not come near me all the time we were in bed. But God, who avenges those who are wronged, permitted this wretch to be titillated in a dream by the recollection of the embraces he was unjustly denying me, so that he let a man go to waste.
