And thus behold the medal reversed and see how they vie with one another in recanting! The work they had previously made so much of is now nothing but a hotch-potch of ridiculous stories, a heap of disjointed fragments, a collection of bedtime fairy tales for children; and men who cannot even understand the book’s syntax begin telling the author to go and light a candle to Saint Mathurin.’

This contrast between the opinions of wise men and fools increased its reputation. Quite soon copies in manuscript were being sold clandestinely. The whole of society as well as what is outside society (all, that is, from the gentleman to the monk) bought the work. Even women took sides. Every family was divided and interests in the dispute went so far that the town was split into two factions, the lunar and the anti-lunar.

The battle had come to skirmishes, when one morning I beheld the entry into Colignac’s room of nine or ten beards with long robes, whose first words to him were these: ‘Sir, you know that there is not one of us in this company who is not your ally, your relative, or your friend, and that, in conse-

1 The patron saint of fools.

quence, nothing shameful can happen to you, which does not bring shame on to our own heads. Nevertheless, we are informed upon good authority that you are harbouring a sorcerer in your castle.’

‘A sorcerer!’ cried Colignac. ‘Ye gods! Tell me his name and I will deliver him into your hands. But take care that this is not a calumny.’

‘How’s that, sir,’ interrupted one of the most venerable of them, ‘is there any parliament more expert in detecting sorcerers than ours? In short, my dear nephew, to keep you in suspense no longer, the sorcerer we denounce is the author of The States and Empires of the Moon. After what he has admitted himself, he could not deny that he is the greatest magician in Europe. How! to have gone up to the moon? Can such a thing be possible without the intervention of— I would not dare to name the beast. For tell me, when all’s said and done, what business had he on the moon?’

‘You may well ask!’ interrupted another. ‘He went to attend the sabbath which was no doubt being held there that day: and he says, in fact, that he was acquainted with the Demon of Socrates. Are you surprised, after that, that he should, as he says, have been brought back to this world by the devil? But be that as it may, don’t you see, all these moons, all these chimneys, all these journeys through the air are neither here nor there, neither here nor there, I say. For between you and me’—at these words he brought his mouth close to Colignac’s ear—‘I have never seen a sorcerer who did not have commerce with the moon.’

After voicing these sound opinions they fell silent, and Colignac was left so dumbfounded at their general extravagance that he could not utter a single word. Seeing this, a venerable booby, who had so far not spoken at all, said: ‘Look here, cousin, we know where the shoe pinches. This magician is a particular friend of yours. But have no fear. Out of consideration for you, the matter will be dealt with discreetly. You have only to hand him over to us and, out of love for you,

we give you our word of honour to have him burnt without
any scandal.’

At these words Colignac, although he was pressing his fists into his sides, could not contain himself. He was seized by a spasm of laughter which offended the gentlemen, his relatives, not a little, so that he was unable to reply to any of the points in their harangue except by a repeated: ha ha ha ha! or ho ho ho ho! Thereupon our gentlemen departed, highly scandalized, and I would say that they had received short shrift—had it. not been such a very long way back to Toulouse.

When they had gone, I drew Colignac into his study and, as soon as I had closed the door behind us, I said to him: “Count, these ambassadors with long hair seem like bearded comets to me. I am afraid that the sound and fury of their outburst may be the rumble of a shaking thunderbolt which is about to fall. Although their accusation may be ridiculous and may well be caused by their stupidity, I should not be any the less dead if a dozen intelligent people, who had seen me roasted, afterwards declared my judges to be fools. All their proofs of my innocence would not bring me to life again and my ashes would stay as cold in a tomb as in the common sewer. ‘That is why, unless you can give me better advice, I should gladly yield to the temptation which bids me leave them nothing of me in this province but my portrait. For I should be doubly vexed to die for something I can scarcely believe myself.’

Colignac had barely the patience to wait for me to finish before replying. At first he teased me, however, but then he saw that I was taking it seriously. ‘Ha! By God,’ he exclaimed with a look of alarm. “They shall not touch the hem of your cloak without myself, my friends, my vassals, and all those who respect me perishing first. My house is such that it cannot be stormed without cannon. It is very advantageously situated and well protected on the flank. But I am insane to be taking precautions against mere parchment storms.’

‘They are sometimes more to be feared,’ I answered, ‘than those from the middle region of the air.’

From that time hence we spoke of nothing but our pleasure. One day we would hunt, another we would ride, another we would receive visitors, sometimes we went visiting; but at length we would always leave off each pastime before we had begun to grow weary of it.

The Marquis of Cussan, a neighbour of Colignac’s and a man with an excellent taste for the good things of life, was generally of our company and we of his. In order to make our sojourns still more agreeable by varying the scene, we would go from Colignac to Cussan and return from Cussan to Colignac. As for our pleasures, the innocent ones of which the body is capable only made up the lesser portion of them. We forewent none of those such as the mind can take, in study and conversation: our libraries, combined like our minds, summoned all learned men to our company. We mixed reading with conversation, conversation with good fare and this with excursions to fish and hunt. In a word, we enjoyed both ourselves, so to speak, and all the most delightful things nature has provided for our use, allowing reason alone to limit our desires.
