uninterrupted bright green offers an emerald expanse as far as the eye can see. Such is the confused mixture of colours with which spring paints the hundred little flowers, that their various shades are lost in one another in an agreeable confusion, and when these flowers are stirred by a gentle zephyr one cannot tell if they are not chasing one another, rather than flying to escape the caresses of the wanton breeze. One could even take this meadow for an ocean, since it is like a sea which offers no shore. My eyes, alarmed at travelling so far without discovering the edge, swiftly dispatched my mind after them. My mind, unwilling to believe it was the end of the world, sought to reason that perhaps the charms of the place had compelled heaven to join on to the earth.

Through the middle of this carpet, which is so broad and pleasant, there runs, amidst silver bubbles, a rustic spring, whose banks are clothed in turf which is adorned with creeping crow-foot, violets, and a hundred other tiny flowers, that seem to jostle one another to see their reflections in it. It is still in its cradle there, for it has only just been born, and its young, smooth face does not show a single wrinkle. The great circles it travels in, winding back on itself a thousand times, reveal how unwilling it is to leave its birthplace. As if it were ashamed to see itself caressed near to its mother’s side, it repulsed my hand with a murmur when I sought to touch it. The animals that came to quench their thirst there, being more reasonable than those of our world, betrayed surprise at seeing that it was broad daylight above the horizon, although they could see the sun at their feet in these antipodes, and they did not dare to lean over the brink, for fear of falling into the firmament of heaven.

I must confess to you that at the sight of so many objects of beauty, I felt myself tickled by those pleasant pains which the embryo is said to feel at the infusion of its soul. My old hairs fell out and gave place to a new head of hair, finer and more luxuriant. I felt my youth rekindle, my face become ruddy, my natural warmth gently mingle once again with my bodily moisture; in short, I went back on my age some fourteen years.

I had made my way half a league through a forest of jasmine and myrtle, when I perceived something lying in the shadows that stirred. It was a youth, whose majestic beauty almost compelled me to adoration. He rose to prevent me.

‘Nay, it is not to me,’ he cried, ‘but to God, that you owe
this homage! ’

‘You see before you a person,’ I answered him, ‘amazed by so many miracles that I do not know where my admiration should begin. For, coming from a world which you here doubtless take for a moon, I thought I had landed in another, which the men of my country also call the moon; and now I find myself in paradise at the feet of a god who will not be adored, a stranger who speaks my own language.’

‘Apart from your ranking me as a god,’ he replied, ‘when I am merely one of His creatures, what you say is true. ‘This earth is the moon which you see from your globe and this place you walk in is paradise, but it is the earthly paradise, where only six human beings have ever set foot: Adam, Eve, Enoch, myself, being old Elijah, St. John the Evangelist, and yourself. You are well aware of how the first two were banished from here, but you do not know how they reached your world. Know, then, that when both had tasted of the forbidden fruit, Adam, who was afraid that God, angered by his presence, might increase his punishment, decided that the moon, your earth, was the only refuge where he might seek shelter from the sanctions of his Creator.

‘Now in those days man’s imagination was so powerful (for it had not yet been corrupted by debauchery, coarse foods, or debilitating diseases) that when it was aroused by his violent desire to reach this asylum, the ardour of his transports made his body light. He was levitated up there in the same way as philosophers, whose imagination was powerfully concentrated on something, have been observed to be lifted into the air by raptures which you would call ecstatic. Eve, whom the infirmity of her sex rendered more feeble and less ardent, would doubtless not have had a powerful enough imagination to overcome the weight of her matter by the force of her will, but since she was only recently taken from the body of her husband, the affinity which still bound this part to its parent carried her towards him as he went up—like a straw drawn to amber, or the loadstone turning towards the regions of the north, whence it has been wrested—and he attracted this portion of himself, just as the sea attracts rivers, which originated in it.

‘Once arrived upon your earth, they made their dwelling between Mesopotamia and Arabia. The Hebrews knew him under the name of Adam and the idolaters under that of Prometheus. The poets made up the story that he had stolen fire from heaven, because he begot descendants endowed with souls as perfect as the one with which God had filled him. Thus, in order to people your world, the first man left this one uninhabited. But it was not the will of the All-Wise God that so happy an abode should remain without inhabitants. A few centuries later He allowed Enoch to grow weary of the company of men, whose innocence was becoming corrupted, and to desire to leave them behind. However, this holy man did not judge any refuge secure from the ambitions of his kinsmen, who were already cutting one another’s throats over the sharing out of your world, other than that blessed land of which Adam, his grandfather, had told him so much. But how was he to go there? Jacob’s ladder had not yet been invented!
