‘There is too little relation,’ he said, ‘between your own senses and the explanation of these mysteries. You men imagine that what you cannot understand is either spiritual or else does not exist, but this conclusion is quite false. ‘The proof of this is the fact that there are perhaps a million things in the universe which you would need a million quite different organs to know. Myself, for example, I know from my senses what attracts the loadstone to the pole, how the tides pull the sea, and what becomes of an animal after its death. Except by an act of faith, you men could no more attain to such lofty conceptions—because you lack the senses proportionate to these marvels—than a blind man could imagine what makes up the beauty of a landscape, the colouring of a picture, or the nuances of the rainbow, unless he imagined them as something palpable like food, as a sound, or as a scent. In exactly the same way, if I sought to explain to you what I perceive with the senses which you do not possess, you would picture it to yourself as something which can be heard, seen, touched, smelt or tasted, and it is, in fact, none of these things.’

He had reached this point in his discourse when my mountebank perceived that the company were beginning to tire of my jargon, which they did not understand and took for inarticulate grunting. He began pulling at my rope harder than ever, so as to make me leap about, until the spectators had debauched themselves with laughing and insisting that I was almost as clever as the beasts in their country, and each returned to his home.

Thus, the cruelty of the ill-treatment I received from my master was alleviated by the visits which this obliging demon paid me. For, as to conversing with those who came to see me, apart from the fact that they took me for an animal well and truly rooted in the category of the brutes, I did not know their language and they did not understand mine and you can judge now what similarity there was between the two. For you must know that only two idioms are used in this country, one

which serves the great and the other which is peculiar to the
common people.

That of the great ones is nothing else but a variety of nonarticulated notes—more or less like our music when the words are not added to the melody—and it is certainly an invention which is at once most useful and most agreeable. For when they are weary of speaking or when they scorn to prostitute their throats for this purpose, they take up either a lute or some other instrument, which they can use just as well as their voices to communicate their ideas to one another. Thus sometimes a company of as many as fifteen or twenty will meet together and dispute a point of theology or the intricacies of a lawsuit in the most harmonious concert one could possibly devise to charm the ear.

The second language, which is in use among the common people, is expressed by the shaking of the limbs, but perhaps not quite as you might imagine it, for certain parts of the body signify a complete speech. For example the agitation of a finger, a hand, an ear, a lip, an arm, an eye, or a cheek will each separately convey a peroration or a sentence with all its parts. Other movements serve only to express words, such as a wrinkling of the brow, the twitching of various muscles, the reversal of the hands, a stamp of the foot and contortions of the arms. Thus when they speak, with the habit they have adopted of going about stark naked, the movements of their limbs, which are well practised in gesticulating their ideas, come so thick and fast that it seems less like a man talking than a body trembling.

The demon came to visit me almost every day and his marvellous conversation permitted me to endure the harshness of my captivity without distress. At length, one morning, I saw a man coming into my little cell whom I did not know at all. After licking me over for a long time he gently picked me up in his mouth by the armpit. With one of his feet he supported me, for fear of my being injured, and tossed me on to his back, where I felt myself so comfortable and so much at ease that, with the distress I felt at being treated like a beast, I had no desire to escape. Besides, these men who walk on all fours move at quite a different speed from us. The heaviest of them
can catch stags by outrunning them.

I was extremely upset, however, at having no news of my courteous demon and on the evening of the first stage, when we had reached our shelter for the night, I was walking about in the inn yard waiting for the meal to be ready, when this very young and tolerably handsome man came up and laughed in my face and threw his two front feet about my neck. After I had examined him for sometime he said to me in French: ‘What? Do you not recognize your friend any more?’

I leave you to imagine how I felt then. Indeed my amazement was so great that I now believed that the whole globe of the moon, all that had happened to me on it and everything I could see there must be nothing but an enchantment. The man-beast, who was in fact the one who had just served me as a mount, went on to address me in these words: ‘You promised me that the services I might render you would never slip your memory, but now one would think you had never seen me before! ’

But he saw that I was still as perplexed as ever. “To cut a long story short,’ he added, ‘I am the Demon of Socrates.’

‘This remark increased my astonishment, but he came to my rescue and went on: ‘I am the Demon of Socrates who entertained you during your imprisonment and in order to continue to be of service to you, I reclothed myself in the body on which I have carried you during the past day.’

‘But how can all this be possible,’ I interrupted, ‘seeing that yesterday you were extremely long in the body and today you are very short, yesterday you had a feeble, quavering voice and today you have a clear, vigorous one, in fact yesterday you were a grey-haired ancient and today you are no more than a youth? How’s this? Instead of travelling from birth towards death, as they do where I come from, do the animals here progress from death to birth and become rejuvenated as they grow older?’
