This vessel was deliberately constructed with a number of surfaces, however, in the form of an icosahedron, and as each facet was both convex and concave, my ball produced the effect of a dazzling mirror.

Neither the gaoler nor his turnkeys ever came up to my room, without finding me busy at this task, but they were not surprised at this, on account of the variety of ingenious pieces of machinery which they saw about the place, and of which I told them I was the inventor. Among other things there were a wind clock, an artificial eye, with which one can see at night, and a sphere on which the stars move as they do in the sky. All this led them to believe that the machine on which I was working was a similar curiosity—and then the money with which Colignac greased their palms helped them to tread softly along many difficult paths.

It was nine o’clock.one morning, my gaoler had gone down, and the sky was overcast, when I brought this machine out on to the summit of my tower, that is to say on to the most exposed part of my terrace. It could be sealed so tightly that not a single particle of air could squeeze inside, except through the two apertures. Inside it I had fitted a small, very light plank, which served me as a seat.

Everything being arranged in this way, I shut myself inside it and remained there for nearly an hour, awaiting the dictates of fortune.

When the clouds cleared from the sun and it began to shine upon my machine, the transparent icosahedron caught the solar riches upon its facets and transmitted their light into my cell through the medium of the glass jar. As this splendour was enfeebled, because the rays could not bend without being split up many times, so the powerful light was refracted and converted my chamber into a miniature heaven of gilded purple.

In the midst of my raptures over the beauty of this rainbow of colours, I suddenly feel my stomach quivering, like that of a man being lifted up by a block and tackle.

I was going to open my hatch in order to learn the cause of

this feeling, but as I was stretching out my hand, I noticed through the hole in the floor of my box that my tower was already far away beneath me, and my little castle in the air, thrusting upwards under my feet, gave me a momentary view of Toulouse plunging downwards into the earth. This marvel did not surprise me because of the suddenness of my flight, but simply because of the frightening leap taken by the human brain towards the achievement of a scheme, which had alarmed me merely to imagine it. Nothing else astonished me, for I had clearly foreseen that the vacuum created in the icosahedron, when the rays of the sun were brought together by the concave glasses, would attract a furious rush of air in order to fill it, which would raise my box. Moreover, as I went up, the fearful wind streaming through the hole could not reach the roof without driving the machine upwards as it forced its way violently through.

Although my plans had been considered with much care, however, one circumstance did take me by surprise, because I had not had sufficient faith in the effectiveness of my mirrors. I had fixed a small sail outside my box, which could easily be controlled by means of a string passing through the bowl of the vessel, of which I held the other end. I had imagined that in this way, when I was in the air, I could take as much wind as I needed to reach Colignac. But in a twinkling the sun which was beating both directly and obliquely upon the shining mirrors of the icosahedron, had hoisted me so high that I lost Toulouse from view. This made me abandon my string, and a very short time later, through one of the four windows which I had set in the sides of the machine, I saw my little sail being snatched away and flying off at the mercy of a whirlwind which had sucked it in.

I recall that in less than an hour I found myself above the middle region of the air. I soon noticed this because I could see it hailing and raining below me. I may perhaps be asked, © where this wind came from (without which my box could not mount), at a level in the heavens which is exempt from meteors. But provided you listen to me, I will answer this objection. I have told you that with the sun beating hard upon my concave mirrors, which focused all its rays together in the middle of the vessel, the air which filled it was driven by the heat through the pipe in the top and that thus a vacuum was left in the vessel. Nature, which abhors this, made it suck in more air through the lower opening, in order to refill itself. If it lost a lot of air, it recovered as much. So you ought not to be amazed that I should have continued to soar in a region above the middle one, where the winds are, because the upper air was turned into a wind by the furious speed at which it rushed in to prevent the vacuum forming and was consequently forced to drive my machine upwards without stopping.

I was scarcely troubled by hunger at all, except when I was crossing the middle region, for actually the coldness of the climate did give me a distant glimpse of it. I say ‘distant’ because the bottle of cordial essence which I always carried and from which I took several draughts, helped me to keep it at bay.

During the whole of the rest of my journey I felt no pangs at all. On the contrary, the more progress I made towards this blazing world, the more robust I felt. I felt my face grow a little warm and brighter than usual. My hands appeared tinged with an agreeable ruddiness and an indefinable joy flowed in my very blood, which made me feel quite elated.

I remember that once when I was pondering about this phenomenon I reasoned in this way: ‘Doubtless, hunger could not assail me, because this pain is but an instinct of nature, which she uses to induce animals to replace with food what they have lost from their substance. But today she senses that the pure, uninterrupted, and proximate radiation from the sun is making me supplement my bodily heat faster than I am losing it and so she no longer gives me this appetite, which would be useless to me.’
