‘But at the very least,’ I retorted, ‘if what you say about this balm is true, it indicates that our souls are endowed with reason. For without employing the instruments of our reason, without relying upon the co-operation of our will, they act independently, as if they were outside us, in applying active to passive. Now if they are both detached from us and reasonable, they must of necessity be spiritual: and if you admit that they are spiritual, then I must conclude that they are immortal—since death in animals only takes place through a transformation of forms which matter alone can adopt.’

The young man then sat up on his bed, made me sit down, and held forth more or less as follows: ‘As for the souls of beasts, which are corporeal, I am not surprised that they should die, seeing that they are conceivably no more than a harmony of the four qualities, a strength of the blood and a proportion of organs well attuned to one another. But I am very surprised that ours, if they are intellectual, disembodied, and immortal, should be forced to leave us by the same causes which make an ox die. Has your soul made a pact with your body, that when the latter receives a sword thrust through the heart, a ball of lead through the brain or a hail of musket shot through the torso, it will abandon its riddled house at once? If so, it must often break its contract—for some men die of a wound from which others will recover—or else each soul must have struck a special bargain with its own body. To be frank with you, if it has as much wit as we are led to believe, it is quite mad to leave its lodging at all, when it sees that on its departure from there it will be allotted to an apartment in hell!

‘And if this soul were as clever and as independently reasonable as they say, and as capable of intelligence, when it is separate from our bodies, as when it is clothed in them, why cannot people born blind, with all the marvellous advantages of this intellectual soul, imagine what it is like to see? Why cannot the deaf hear? Is it perhaps because they have not yet been deprived by death of all the rest of their senses? So I suppose I cannot use my right hand because I still have a left one? They claim to prove that it could not function without the senses even if it were spiritual, by taking the example of a painter, who cannot paint a picture if he has no brushes. Yes, but that is not to say that if this painter, who cannot work without brushes, had lost, as well as his brushes, his colours, his chalks, his canvases, and his palettes, he could then work better. Quite the contrary! The more obstacles there are standing in the way of his work, the more impossible it will be for him to paint. And yet they would have it that this soul, which can only function imperfectly during the course of life on account of the loss of one of its tools, can none the less operate to perfection when it has lost them all after death. But if they come harping to me on the theme that it does not need these instruments to perform its functions, I shall harp to them on the theme that the inmates of the Quinze Vingts Hospital for the Blind must be whipped for pretending not to see a thing.’

‘But,’ I said to him, ‘if our souls were to die, as I see you wish to conclude, the Resurrection to which we look forward would be nothing but an illusion, for God would have to create them all over again—and that would not be resurrection.’

He interrupted me with a toss of his head. ‘Eh? What’s all this, in heaven’s name?’ he cried. ‘Who has been putting you to sleep with that fairy story? What! You? What! Me? What! My chambermaid? Brought to life?’

‘It is not,’ I replied, ‘a story made up for amusement: it is an indubitable truth, which I will prove to you.’

‘And J,’ he said, ‘will prove the contrary to you.

‘Let us begin by supposing that you eat a Mohammedan. Consequently you convert him into your substance! For is it not true that this Mohammedan, when digested, is transformed partly into flesh, partly into blood, and partly into sperm? You then lie with your wife and cast a handsome little Christian into the matrix with seed entirely drawn from the Mohammedan corpse. My question is: will the Mohammedan ultimately get his body back? If the earth gives it back to him,

oo

the little Christian will not get his, since he is, in his entirety, nothing but a part of the Mohammedan’s. But if you tell me that the little Christian will have his, that means that God will be taking away from the Mohammedan what the little Christian had only received from him. Thus one or other of them is bound to lack a body!

‘Now you may reply that God will produce more matter to provide for the one who has not enough. Yes, but then another obstacle holds us up, which is that when the damned Mohammedan is resuscitated and God provides him with a completely new body (on account of his old one being stolen from him by the Christian), since the body alone does not make the man, any more than the soul (each being as much an integral part of the man as the other), if God models a fresh body for this Mohammedan, he is no longer the same individual. So God damns a different man from the one who deserves hell. This body has fornicated, this body has criminally abused all its senses—and in order to punish it, God throws a different one into the flames, one which is virgin, which is pure, which has never lent its organs to the commission of the smallest crime! And what is even more ridiculous is that this body deserves hell and paradise at the same time, for, as a Mohammedan it must be damned and as a Christian it must be saved. God cannot send it to paradise without being unjust and rewarding it with glory in place of the damnation it earned as a Mohammedan. He cannot hurl it into hell without being equally unjust, rewarding it with eternal death, instead of the blessedness it had earned as a Christian. If He wishes to be fair, He must both damn and save this man eternally.’

I then spoke in my turn. ‘I have nothing to reply,’ I retorted, ‘to your sophistical arguments against the Resurrection, for God has told us and God cannot lie.’

‘Not so fast,’ he replied. ‘You have already got as far as: “God has told us.” But you must first prove that there is a God, for personally I flatly deny it.’
