“The reigning one at present is a dove, who is so peaceable by nature that the other day, when two sparrows had to be reconciled, we had all the trouble in the world to make him understand what enmity was.’

My magpie could not carry on a conversation for so long without some of those present taking note of it and, as it was already suspected of some intelligence, the principals of the assembly gave the order for it to be put under arrest by an eagle of the guard, which secured its person. Meanwhile King Dove arrived. Everyone fell silent and the first thing which broke the silence was the accusation made by the Birds’ Public Prosecutor against the magpie.

When the King was fully informed of the scandal it had caused, he asked its name and how it knew me. ‘Sire,’ it replied, greatly surprised, ‘I am called Margot. ‘There are many birds of quality here who will answer for me. One day in the world of the earth, of which I am a native, I learned from Chirp the Snuffler here (who heard me crying in a cage and came to visit me at the window where I was hanging) that my father was Shorttail and my mother Crunchnut. But for him I should never have known, for I had been stolen from under my parents’ wing in my nest at a very early age. My mother died of grief a short time afterwards and my father, who was then past an age to beget more children, despaired at seeing himself without heirs and went off to the Wars of the Jays, where he was killed by a peck in the brains.

‘Those who carried me off were certain wild animals known as swineherds, which took me to be sold at a castle, where I saw this man who you are now trying. I do not know if he conceived some affection for me, but he took the trouble to instruct the servants to chop up my food and sometimes had the goodness to prepare it for me himself. If I was chilled in winter, he would take me near the fire, wrap up my cage or tell the gardener to warm me in his shirt. In his presence the servants did not dare to tease me and I remember the day when he rescued me from the jaws of a cat, when my lady’s
little lackey had delivered me into its clutches.

‘But it will not be beside the point to tell you the cause of this barbarous deed. To please Shrimp (which was the little lackey’s name), I was one day repeating the trifles he had taught me. Now unfortunately it occurred that, although I always recited my phrases together, one after the other, just when he had come in and given a false message I happened to say in order: “Hold your tongue, you son of a whore! You lie! ’’ The accused here, who knew the dishonest nature of the rogue, imagined that I might well have spoken prophetically and sent round to the place to see if Shrimp had been there. Shrimp was convicted of deception; Shrimp was whipped and, but for him, Shrimp would have made pussy eat me.’

The King nodded, to indicate that he was pleased with the pity it had taken on my disaster, but he forbade it to talk to me in secret any more. He then asked the counsel for the prosecution if he was ready to open his case. The latter signified with its claw that it was about to speak and here, as far as I can recall, are the main points it made against me.

16

Indictment of an animal accused of being a man, delivered before the assembled chambers of the Parliament of the Birds

‘My lords, the injured party in the case against this criminal is Guillemette the Plump, partridge by extraction, recently arrived from the world of the earth with a gaping wound in her breast from a lead pellet fired at her by men, plaintiff against the human race and, in consequence, against an animal which is, I maintain, a member of that great tribe. It would not be difficult for us to prevent any outrages it might commit by simply putting it to death. Nevertheless, since our

INDICTMENT OF AN ANIMAL

Republic of the living is concerned with the preservation or destruction of all living things, it seems to me that we should deserve to have been born men—that is to say deprived of the reason and immortality which make us their superiors—if we imitated a single one of their acts of injustice.

‘Let us therefore, my lords, submit the difficulties of this case to the keenest scrutiny of which our divine spirits are capable.

“The case turns on whether this animal is a man and, in the event of our determining that it is, whether, for this, it deserves to die.

‘For myself, I find no difficulty whatever in concluding that it is one, firstly from the feeling of horror which overwhelms us all at the sight of it, without our being able to give the reason; secondly, because it laughs like a fool; thirdly, because it weeps like an idiot; fourthly, because it wipes its nose like a knave; fifthly, because its plumage is mangy; sixthly, because it wears its tail in front; seventhly, because it always has a quantity of little square stones in its mouth, which it has not the wit either to spit out or swallow; eighthly, and in conclusion, because every morning it lifts up its eyes and its great beak, sticks its open hands flat against one another with the points towards heaven and makes of them a single captive one—as if it were tired of having two free hands—and breaks its legs in half so that it falls upon its hams: then, as a result of the magic words it mutters, I have observed that its broken legs are mended and it gets up afterwards as cheerful as before. Now you know, gentlemen, that of all the animals, only man has a soul black enough to give himself up to magic: consequently this isa man. We must now examine if, for being a man, it deserves to die.

‘I think, my lords, that it has never been called into doubt that all creatures are produced by our common mother to live in society. Now if I prove that man seems to be born only to disrupt society, will I not prove that, by opposing the very purpose of his own creation, he deserves that nature should repent of her handiwork?
