‘Unlike them, I do not assume any proposition I cannot prove. I therefore invite you to take a log or some other combustible matter and set fire to it. When it is burning they will say that what was wood has become fire, but I tell them no. There is no more fire in it when it is in flames than before you set a match to it. The fire which lay hidden in the log and which the cold and the damp prevented from spreading and being active, has been succoured by the newcomer. Rallying its forces against the phlegm which had it by the throat, it has stormed the field that was occupied by its enemy, and can now show itself freely as it triumphs over its gaoler. Do you not see the water running away at both ends of the tree stump, still hot and smoking from the fight it has put up?

“The flame which you observe above it is the most refined fire, the most disengaged from the matter, and the soonest ready, in consequence, to return to its home. But it holds together in a pyramid up toa certain height, in order to force its way up through the dense humidity of the air which resists it. ‘Then, as they rise, the particles of fire gradually become disengaged from the violent company of their fellows. Finally they take their leave of one another because they encounter nothing further which is hostile to their passage. ‘This carelessness is very often the cause of a second imprisonment, for, travelling separately, they sometimes get lost in a cloud. If they meet one another at other times in sufficiently large numbers to hold their own against the vapour, they join forces; they rumble; they thunder, and they flash. And the animated rage of these inanimate objects often causes the death of innocent people. But if a particle of fire finds itself held fast by this oppressive unrefined matter of the middle region and is not strong enough to defend itself, it abandons itself to the mercy of its enemy, which forces it, by its weight, to fall back to earth. The unfortunate, enclosed in a drop of water, will find itself perhaps at the foot of an oak tree, whose animal fire will call to the poor wayfarer to lodge with it. And thus we behold it returning to the same state as it left several days before.

‘But let us consider the fate of the other elements of which our log was composed. The air retires to its home district, but still mingled with vapour, which the fire, in all its wrath, has brusquely expelled hither and thither. Now we can see it serving as a football to the winds, supplying the breathing of the animals and filling the vacuum made by nature. It is possible, in addition, that a particle of this air, engulfed in a drop of dew, will be sucked in and digested by the thirsty leaves of the tree in which our fire has also come to rest.

‘The water which the flames drove out of the log, raised by the heat as high as the cradle of the meteors, is as likely to fall back as rain on to our oak tree as on to any other.

‘And the earth from it, turned into ashes and then cured of its sterility—either by the nourishing heat of a dunghill it has been thrown on, or by the vegetative salts of neighbouring plants, or by the fertile water of streams—may well end up near the oak tree, be attracted by the warmth of its seed, and become absorbed as a part of the whole.

‘Thus we observe the four elements all suffering the same fate and returning to the state they were in some days before. Therefore one can say that there is everything in a man that it takes to make a tree, and everything in a tree that it takes to make a man. In this way all things ultimately meet in everything, but we lack a Prometheus to draw from the bosom of nature and make perceptible to us what I would call primary matter.’

>

On trial

SucH, more or less, were the matters with which we passed the time, for the little Spaniard had a pretty wit. Our conversations only took place at night, however, since from six in the morning until the evening we should have been distracted by the great throng of people that came to stare at us in our house. Some of them threw stones at us, some of them nuts and some of them grass. There was no talk of anything but the King’s beasts. They served us with food every day at our meal times and the Queen and King themselves quite often took the trouble to feel my belly, to see if I was not filling out at all, for they were consumed with an extraordinary desire to start a breed of these little animals. I do not know if it was from being more attentive to their grimaces and their sounds than my male, but I learned quicker than he to understand their language and to murder it a little, which made them consider us in quite a different way from before.

‘The news at once ran through the kingdom that two wild men had been found, smaller than the rest of them (on account of the poor nourishment we had taken in our isolated state) and, thanks to a failing in their fathers’ seed, with front legs too weak to carry their own weight.

This belief would have spread and taken root, if the priests of the country had not made a stand against it, saying that it was shocking impiety to believe that not merely beasts, but monsters could belong to their species. ‘Even our domestic animals,’ added the more dispassionate of them, ‘would be much more likely to share in humanity’s privilege of immortality—for they are born in our country—than a monstrous beast that says it was born heaven knows where in the moon. And then consider the visible difference between us and them: we walk upon four feet, because God would not entrust something so precious to a less secure posture. He was afraid of some misfortune befalling man if he walked in any other way: that is why He took the trouble to set him upon four columns, so that he could not fall. But, scorning to interfere with the construction of these two brutes, He abandoned them to the whim of Nature, who had no fears about the loss of something so trivial, and placed them upon two paws only.

‘Not even the birds,’ they said, ‘have been so ill used as these. At least they have been given feathers to compensate for the feebleness of their legs, so that they can launch themselves into the air when we drive them from our houses; while nature, in taking away two of these monsters’ feet has rendered them incapable of flight from our justice.
