In fact, as I rose higher, I made exactly the same observation of Mercury. I also noticed that all these worlds have other small worlds travelling round them. Reflecting later upon the reasons for the design of this great universe, I decided that when chaos was being ordered, after God had created matter, similar bodies must have been joined together in obedience to that unknown principle of affinity, according to which we experience that like things are attracted to one another. Particles shaped in one way congregated to make air. Others, whose shapes may have given them a spinning motion, came together to compose the globes which are called heavenly bodies. This inclination to pirouette upon their poles, which their shape forces on them, must not only have made them mass themselves into the spherical shape we observe, it must also have caused the lesser orbs which are to be found in their sphere of activity to turn, as they evaporated off the main body and adopted a similar motion in their flight. That is why Mercury, Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn were all compelled to pirouette and roll round the sun together. Not that one cannot imagine all these other globes to have once been suns—since despite its present extinction, the earth still retains enough warmth to make the moon revolve round it with the circular motion of a body which has broken free from its mass, and Jupiter retains enough to make four revolve. But in the course of time these suns have suffered such a considerable loss of light and fire, through continually giving off those small bodies which produce heat and illumination, that they are now left as cold, shadowy, and also impotent husks.

We can even observe how the spots on the sun, which the ancients never noticed, are growing from day to day. Who knows, then, if this is not a crust forming upon its surface — its fire gradually going out as it gives off more and more light? Or if, when all these mobile bodies have abandoned it, it will not become an opaque globe, like the earth? There are very distant ages before which no vestige of the human race appears. Perhaps the earth was once a sun, peopled with creatures suited to the climate which produced them, and perhaps these animals were the demons of which antiquity records so many instances. Why not? Could not these creatures still have lived here for some time after the extinction of the earth and before the changes in their globe had completely destroyed all their race? It is a fact that, according to the evidence of Plutarch, they continued to exist until the time of Augustus.

Even the prophetic and sacred Testament of our first patriarchs would seem to take us by the hand and lead us to the same truth: for there one reads about the revolt of the angels before there is any talk of man. Is not this time sequence, which the Scriptures observe, virtually a proof that the angels inhabited the earth before us? And that these proud ones, who had dwelt on our world at that time when it was a sun, very likely scorning to continue their residence there as soon as it became extinct and knowing that God had placed his throne in the sun, dared to try and usurp it? But to punish their impudence, God banished them even from the earth and created man, less perfect; but in consequence less proud, to take their place there.

13

A small world and the end
of a hazardous journey

AFTER travelling for some four months—at least as far as one could calculate, with no nights intervening to mark off the days—I landed on one of the little earths which hover about round the sun (known to the mathematicians as sunspots). Some clouds had got in the way, so that my mirrors attracted less heat and the wind began to propel my cabin with less vigour. The remaining current of air was only capable of breaking my fall and lowering me on to the tip of a very high mountain, where I landed gently.

I will leave you to imagine the joy I experienced at finding my feet on solid ground after having played the part of a bird for so long. In fact words are powerless to express the surge of emotion I felt on emerging and finally seeing my head bathed in the brilliance of the heavens. This rapture did not transport me so completely, however, that I omitted, on leaving it, to cover the top of my box with my shirt before I moved off; because I was afraid that if the air cleared and the sun once more heated up my mirrors, as was likely, I should never find my house again.

Through gorges which bore traces of having been carved

out by water, I climbed down on to the plain, where I could hardly walk on account of the thick mud, which enriched the soil. However, after going for some distance I arrived at a quagmire, where I came upon a little man, stark naked, sitting resting on a stone. I do not remember if I spoke to him first or if it was he who questioned me, but I have a recollection quite as fresh as if I were still listening to him, of how he addressed me for three solid hours in a language, which I am perfectly sure I had never heard before and which had no connexion with any in this world, but which, none the less, I understood more readily and more clearly than my mother tongue. He explained, when I asked him about this marvel, that in the sciences there is a truth, outside of which nothing is easy. The more a language departs from this truth, the more it falls short of the concepts it seeks to express and the harder it is to understand.

‘Similarly,’ he continued, ‘in music one never encounters this truth, without the soul being at once exalted and blindly attracted to it. We cannot see it, but we sense that nature sees it, and, without our knowing how, we are absorbed by it. It never fails to ravish our souls, even though hidden from our eyes. It is exactly the same with language. A man who discovers this truth in letters, words, and their sequence can never fall short of his original conception in expressing himself: his speech is always equal to his thought. It is ignorance of this perfect idiom that makes you falter, knowing neither the order nor the words to explain what you have in mind.’

I remarked that the first man in our world had doubtless made use of this original language, because the name he had given to each thing proclaimed its essence.
