‘This heavenly malady fired their blood with an ardour so noble that, on the advice of the wisest men, they enrolled this troop of friends to fight in the same company. On account of the brave actions they performed they were later called the Sacred Band. Their exploits exceeded by far what Thebes had expected of them, for in battle each of these heroes ventured to perform such daring deeds, either in order to protect his beloved or to win his love, that antiquity has never seen the like of them. Thus as long as this company of lovers was in existence the Thebans, who had previously been considered the worst soldiers among the Greeks, always fought and conquered everyone, even the Spartans themselves, the most warlike people on earth.

‘But among the infinite number of praiseworthy actions of which these apples were the cause, the same apples, in their innocence, also produced some most shameful ones.

‘Mirrha, a young noblewoman, ate of them with her father, Cinyrus. Unfortunately one of those they ate was of Pylades and the other of Orestes. Love at once overwhelmed nature andconfounded it to such an extent that Cinyrus could swear: “I am my own son-in-law!” and Mirrha: “I am my stepmother.” In short I think I can unfold to you the whole of their crime, by adding that at the end of nine months the father became the grandfather of the children he had begotten
and the daughter gave birth to her own brothers.

‘But chance was not content with this one crime and desired that a bull which had entered the gardens of King Minos should unhappily find there beneath a tree of Orestes several apples which it swallowed. I say “unhappily”, because Queen Pasiphaé ate of this fruit every day. Behold the two of them consumed with a raging love for one another! I will not describe to you the enormity of its consummation. It will suffice to say that Pasiphaé sank to a crime for which there was no precedent.

‘At precisely the same time the famous sculptor, Pygmalion, was carving a marble Venus at the palace. The queen, who liked good workmen, presented him, as a ceremonial treat, with a couple of these apples. He ate the finest of them and because he happened to lack water, which, as you know, is necessary for the cutting of marble, he moistened his statue with the other. The marble at the same time, penetrated by this juice, gradually grew soft and the energetic virtue of this apple did its work according to the artist’s design, following within the image the features it had encountered on the surface. For it dilated, warmed, and coloured, in natural proportions, the parts it encountered in its passage. Finally the marble came to life and, moved by the passion from the apple, embraced Pygmalion with all the strength of its heart and Pygmalion, transported by a corresponding love, received it for his wife.

‘In this same province the young Iphis had eaten of this fruit with the fair Ianthé, her companion, in all the circumstances necessary to cause a mutual friendship. Their feast had its usual sequel but because Iphis had found it extremely tasty she ate so much that her friendship, which increased with the number of apples she ate—for she could not have enough of them—usurped all the functions of love and,as this love gradually increased, so it became more male and more vigorous. For as her whole body, which was imbued with this fruit, burned to perform the motions which corresponded to the impulses of her desire, it moved its own matter so powerfully that it constructed for itself much more powerful organs, ones capable of putting her thoughts into action and fully sublimating her love to its most virile extent. That is to say, Iphis became what it is necessary to be in order to marry a woman.

‘I should call this occurrence a miracle if I had another name left for the event which follows.

‘A young and greatly gifted man called Narcissus had won, by his love, the affection of an extremely beautiful girl whom the poets have celebrated under the name of Echo. But women, as you know, more than our sex, are never satisfied with the way they are loved. Having heard the virtues of the apples of Orestes being praised, she succeeded in obtaining some from several places. And because she was afraid, since love is always still apprehensive, that those of one tree might be weaker than those of another, she wanted him to taste two of them. But no sooner had he eaten them than the picture of Echo was effaced from his memory—all his love was directed towards the one who had eaten the fruit: he was both lover and beloved; for the substance drawn from the apple of Pylades embraced in him that of the apple of Orestes. This twin fruit, distributed throughout the whole mass of his body, aroused all the parts of his body to caress one another. His heart, into which their double virtue flowed, directed its warmth inwards, towards itself. All his limbs, animated with his passion, sought to penetrate one another. Even his reflection, burning with passion amidst the cold of the pools, drew his body close that they might be united. In short poor Narcissus became hopelessly in love with himself.

‘I will not bore you by relating the sad end that befell him. The past ages have spoken of it enough. But I have two more adventures to relate to you which will take up the time better.

‘You must know that the fair Salmacis was acquainted with the shepherd Hermaphroditus, but on no more familiar terms than the proximity of their houses would permit. ‘Then fortune, who delights in upsetting the most untroubled lives, permitted that at a games where the prizes for beauty and for running were two of these apples, Hermaphroditus won that for running and Salmacis that for beauty. Although they had been plucked together they had grown on different branches, for these affectionate fruits mingled together with so much cunning that one from Pylades was always to be found next to one from Orestes and that was the reason why people generally picked one of each, since they appeared to be twins. The fair Salmacis ate her apple and the good Hermaphroditus thrust his own into his wallet. Salmacis was overcome with the passions inspired both by her own apple and by the young shepherd’s apple, which was beginning to grow warm in his wallet. She began to feel attracted to him by the flow of sympathy between her own apple and the other.
