‘As further proof of this universal mite-system, you need only consider how when you are wounded the blood runs to the wound. Your doctors say that it is guided bynature seeking to help the weakened parts, but that is just a pretty fantasy, for in that case there would have to be a third intellectual substance in us, apart from mind and soul, with separate functions and separate organs. That is why I find it much more plausible to say that these little animals, finding themselves attacked, send word to their neighbours to ask for help. When they are gathered together from all sides, the country is unable to support so many and they either die of hunger or are suffocated in the throng. These deaths occur when the abscess is ripe and the fact that the rotten flesh goes numb proves that these creatures are stifled then. If the bleeding, which is prescribed to divert the flow, does very often take effect, this is because the little animals have already lost many of their number through the opening they were trying to block and now refuse to assist their allies, having barely the strength to defend themselves, each on their own ground.’

He had concluded in this way when the second philosopher found all our eyes focused upon his, exhorting him to speak in his turn.

‘Men,’ he said, ‘seeing that you are interested in teaching this little animal, our fellow creature, something of the science which we profess, I shall be very pleased to supply him with a treatise which I am now dictating, on account of the illuminating light it sheds on our physics: it isan explanation of the eternal origin of the world. But I am in a hurry to start my bellows working, as the town is leaving tomorrow without delay, so I hope you will excuse me for the moment, with the

promise, however, that as soon as it arrives at its destination,
I will satisfy you.’

At these words the host’s son called his father to know what time it was, but when the latter replied that eight o’clock had struck, he flew into a rage and asked him why he had not notified them when it was seven, as he had commanded him to do: he knew very well that the houses were leaving next day and the town walls had done so already.

‘My son,’ replied the good man, ‘an express prohibition has been published while you were at table, forbidding anyone to leave until the day after tomorrow.’

‘That makes no difference,’ retorted the young man. ‘You should obey me blindly, without trying to understand my orders, and only remember what I have commanded. Quickly now, go and fetch your effigy! ’

When it was brought he seized it by the arm and whipped it for a good quarter of an hour. ‘Now, sir, you good-fornothing,’ he went on, ‘as a punishment for your disobedience I will make a laughing-stock of you today, for all to see, and to this end I command you to walk upon two legs only for the rest of the day.’

The poor old man went out in floods of tears and his son continued: “Gentlemen, I must ask you to excuse the knaveries of this hot-headed fellow. I had hopes of making something of him, but he has abused my indulgence. For my part, I believe the rascal will be the death of me. To tell you the truth, I have been on the verge of cutting him off with my curse ten times already.’

I found it very difficult, although I bit my lips, to keep myself from laughing at this topsy-turvy world. So, in order to have done with his burlesque of discipline, which would doubtless have ended by making me guffaw, I begged him to tell me what he meant by this journey of the town’s he had mentioned just now, and whether the houses and walls actually travelled.

He replied to me: ‘Among our towns, dear stranger, there are both mobile and sedentary ones. The mobile ones, like the one we are in now, for example, are made in the following manner. The architect constructs each mansion of a very light wood, as you can see; underneath it he installs four wheels; in the thickness of one of the walls he sets ten large pairs of bellows, whose nozzles lie in a horizontal line across the top storey from gable to gable, so that when we want to drive the towns somewhere else (for they have a change of air for each of the seasons) everyone unfurls a quantity of large sails on one of the sides of his house in front of the bellows. Then when a mechanism has been wound up to make them work, in less than a week their houses can be transported over a hundred leagues, if it is desired, by the constant blasts vomited from these wind-monsters.

‘As for those which we call “sedentary”, the dwellings there are very like your towers, except that they are made of wood and have a huge and powerful screw running through the centre of them from cellar to roof, so that they can be raised and lowered at discretion. A hollow is dug out of the earth, as deep as the building is high, and the whole is constructed in this way so that, as soon as the frosts begin to chill the heavens, they can lower their houses into the earth, where they remain in shelter from the inclemencies of the air. But immediately the gentle breezes of spring arrive to soften it, they come up into the light by means of the great screw I have told you of.’

I begged him, since he had already shown me so much kindness and the town was only leaving on the following day, to tell me something of that eternal origin of the world, which he had mentioned to me some time before. ‘And I promise you,’ I said to him, ‘that in recompense, as soon as I return to the moon from whence my tutor (I indicated my demon) will bear witness to you that I have come, I will spread your reputation there, by recounting the fine things which you have told me. It is easy to see that this promise makes you laugh, because you do not believe that the moon I speak of is a world or that Iam an inhabitant of it; but I can also assure you that the peoples of that world, who take this one for a mere moon,

will make fun of me when I say that your moon is a world
with landscapes and inhabitants.’
