Meanwhile my ascent continued, and as it brought me closer to this fiery world I felt a certain joy flowing in my blood, which purified it and penetrated into my very soul. From time to time I looked up to admire the brilliance of the tints shining into my little crystal dome and I still have a vivid memory of how, at a moment when I am directing my gaze up into the globe of my vessel, with a sudden start I can feel something heavy flying away from every part of my body. An eddy of smoke, very thick and almost palpable, plunged my glass into darkness, and when I sought to stand up and study this night, which had blinded me, I could now see neither the vessel nor the mirrors, nor the glass, nor the lid of my cabin. I therefore lowered my eyes, hoping to discover what had made my masterpiece collapse thus in ruins, but where it should have been, with the four walls and the floor, I could find nothing but the sky, completely surrounding me. What alarmed me still more was to feel some invisible obstacle repulsing my arms, when I thought to extend them, just as if the fluidity of the air had become petrified. The notion came to me that, as a result of rising so high, I must have reached the firmament, which certain philosophers and some astronomers have alleged to be solid. I was already beginning to be afraid that I should be left encrusted in it forever, but the shock caused me by this bizarre occurrence was greatly increased by those that followed, for my gaze, in wandering here and there, having chanced to fall upon my chest, instead of stopping at the surface of my body, passed right through it! Then a moment later I became aware that I could see directly behind myself. As if my body had no longer been anything but an organ of sight, I felt my flesh, purged of its opacity, transmitting straight through itself, objects to my eyes and my vision to objects. Finally, after bumping against the roof, the floor, and the walls of my chair a thousand times without seeing them, I discovered that, through some secret law governing the light near its source, we had become transparent, my cabin and I.

If it had merely become diaphanous, I should still have been able to see it, since one can quite easily make out glass, crystal, and diamonds which are the same. But I deduce that in a region so near to it, the sun must purge bodies of their opacity much more perfectly, aligning the imperceptible openings in matter straighter than in our world, where its strength is almost used up by the long distance it has to travel, so that it is only just capable of infusing its brilliance into precious stones. At all events, on account of the internal evenness of their surfaces, the sun makes them pour out through their glass (as if through little eyes) either the green of emeralds, the scarlet of rubies, or the violet of amethysts— according as the different pores in the stones are straighter or more tortuous and as the varying quantities of reflections either extinguish or rekindle this enfeebled light.

One difficulty may be troubling the reader, namely to know how I could see myself yet not see my box, since I had become transparent just as much as it had. My answer to this is that doubtless the sun affects living bodies and inanimate ones differently, since no part of my flesh, bones, or bowels, although transparent, had lost its natural colour. On the contrary, my lungs still kept their soft delicacy beneath a tinge of pinkish red; my heart, ever vermilion, see-sawed easily between systole and diastole; my liver seemed to burn in a purple fire, heating the air which I breathed and maintaining the circulation of the blood; in a word, I could see and feel myself to be just the same—even if in fact I was not.

While I was considering this metamorphosis, my journey was growing ever shorter, but then my pace was much slower on account of the stillness of the upper air, which grew more rarefied as I drew nearer to the source of the daylight. For as matter at this level is very dilute, on account of the great amount of vacuum it contains, which, being inactive makes it very lazy, this air could not produce more than a gentle breeze as it passed through the hole in my box, which was scarcely capable of sustaining it.

I never reflect upon the malicious caprices of fortune, who continually opposed herself so obstinately to the success of my enterprise, without being astonished at how I did not take leave of my senses. But hearken to a miracle, which future centuries will find difficult to believe.

Enclosed in a translucent box, which I had just lost from view, with my impetus so reduced that I was lucky to keep from falling—in short, in a predicament where the whole system of the cosmos was powerless to save me—I found myself stranded in a state of extreme distress. However, just as when we are dying we are internally impelled to want to embrace those to whom we owe our existence, so I raised my eyes to the sun, our common father. This upsurge of my will not only sustained my body, but projected it on towards the thing it aspired to embrace. My body pushed my box and in this fashion I continued my journey. As soon as I noticed this, I stiffened all the faculties of my soul with more concentration than ever, in order to fasten them, in imagination, to what attracted me. But the burden of my cabin on the top of my head (for I was pressed against the ceiling in spite of myself by the effects of my will) incommoded me to such an extent that I was eventually constrained by its weight to feel for the place where the invisible door was. Happily I found it, opened it and flung myself out; but the natural fear of falling, which all animals have when they are caught in midair, made me stretch out my arms briskly to catch hold of something. I was only guided by an unthinking instinct of nature, however, and that is why fortune, her enemy, maliciously thrust my hand against the crystal top.
