bornness of my fate, and win over its malevolence. But to what other invention could I have had recourse? For in crossing a great town like Toulouse, where prints of me had made me known even to the fishwives, clad in an assortment of rags as motley as a harlequin’s, was it not likely that I should be noticed and recognized immediately and that the only counter-charm was the character of a beggar, a role which may be played with all kinds of faces? And then if I had not planned this ruse and all the precautions that went with it, I should have had to be very strong-minded not to be driven mad in the midst of such an unhappy predicament.

I was therefore proceeding on my way, when all of a sudden I felt compelled to retrace my steps, for my revered gaoler and some dozen constables of his acquaintance, who had delivered him from the hands of the riff-raff, after giving chase and patrolling all the town in search of me, had unfortunately appeared in my path. As soon as they caught sight of me with their lynx eyes, it was but the work of a moment for them to begin to fly with all their strength and for me to take flight with all mine. I was so hotly pursued that sometimes my liberty felt upon the back of its neck the breath of the tyrants who sought to oppress it. But it seemed that the air they were driving along, as they ran behind me, drove me along in front of them. Finally either heaven or fear gave me a lead of four or five side streets. It was then that my hunters missed the scent and the spoor and I the sight and the din of this alarming chase.

I am sure that anyone who has not been through such agonies, for I speak as one who has, would find it hard to get the measure of the joy which left me trembling all over, when I saw that I had escaped. However, because my safety demanded the whole of my attention, I resolved to be very thrifty in making use of the time they took to catch up with me.I dirtied my face, rubbed dust into my hair, stripped off my ~ doublet, lowered my breeches and threw my hat in at a cellar window. Then I spread out my handkerchief on the pave- ment and placed four little stones at the corners, as men do who are stricken with the plague. I lay down beside it, my belly against the earth and set up a melancholy whining in a piteous voice. I had hardly taken up my station, when I began to hear the mob shouting itself hoarse, long before I heard the sound of their feet. I had still enough presence of mind, however, to stay in the same position, in the hope of not being recognized by them at all—and I was not disappointed. ‘They all took me for a victim of the plague and passed very quickly, stopping their noses, and most of them threw a coin on to my handkerchief.

The storm thus dissipated, I ducked into an alley, put my clothes on again and abandoned myself once more to fortune, but I had apparently run so far that she was tired of following me. One is compelled to believe that this was so, for after a good deal of traversing squares, running the length of streets, and cutting across them, this haughty goddess, unaccustomed to travelling at such speed and the better to have done with my wanderings, allowed me to fall blindly into the hands of the constables who were pursuing me. On meeting me they gave throat to a thunderous cry so enraged that it left me completely deaf. ‘Thinking they had not enough arms to arrest me with, they used their teeth as well. One dragged me by the hair, another by the collar, while the more dispassionate of them were searching me. This search was better fated than the one in prison: they found the rest of my gold.

While these charitable doctors were engaged in curing the dropsy of my purse, a great uproar arose. The whole square resounded with the words: ‘Kill! kill!’ and at the same time I saw the flashing of swords. The gentlemen who were dragging me along shouted that it was the Grand Provost’s constables trying to rob them of their capture. ‘But beware of falling into their hands,’ they said to me, pulling at me harder than ever, ‘for you will be condemned within twenty-four hours, and the King will not save you.’

In the end, however, alarmed by the scuffle in which they

were beginning to be involved, they abandoned me so completely that I was left all alone in the middle of the street, while the aggressors were carrying out a butchery of all they encountered. I will leave you to imagine whether I took flight, having equal reason to fear both parties. In a little while I got away from the brawl and I was already asking the way to the Post, when a torrent of people in flight from the fray disgorged into my street. Not being able to resist the crowd, I went with it and, growing weary after running for such a long time, in the end I reached a very dark little door, through which I threw myself pell-mell with the other fugitives. We barred it behind ourselves and then, when everybody had got their breath back, one of the troop said: ‘Comrades, if you will take my advice, let us pass through the two grilles and hold fast in the courtyard.’

These fearful words struck my ears with such a distressing shock that I thought I should fall dead upon the spot. Alas, all at once—but too late—I perceived that instead of escaping to a place of safety, as I had believed, I had come and thrown myself into prison, so impossible is it to escape the vigilance of one’s star. I looked at this man more closely and recognized him as one of the constables who had run after me for so long. A cold sweat rose to my brow at this; I paled and began to feel faint. The people who saw me so weak were moved with compassion and called for water. Everyone crowded round to help me and by ill chance this accursed constable was one of the first. As soon as he clapped eyes on me, he recognized me at once. He made a sign to his companions and all together they greeted me with one great: I arrest you in the King’s name! Nothing further was needed to put me in prison.

I remained in the reception cell until the evening when, one after the other, every turnkey came to trace my picture on the canvas of his memory by making an exact dissection of the parts of my face.
