However, when the supply was all used up, the contrivance failed and I was resigning myself to leaving my crown upon that of some mountain when (without my making any movement at all) I felt my levitation continuing. My machine took leave of me and I saw it falling back towards the earth. This extraordinary occurrence filled my heart with a joy so uncommon that in my delight at seeing myself delivered from certain disaster, I had the impudence to philosophize upon it. As I was thus exercising my eyes and my brain to seek out the cause, I noticed my swollen flesh, still greasy with the marrow I had smeared upon myself for the bruises from my tumble. I realized that the moon was on the wane and, just as it is accustomed in that quarter to suck the marrow out of animals,’ so it was drinking up what I had smeared upon myself, and with all the more strength because its globe was nearer to me, so that its vigour was in no way impaired by the intervention of clouds.

When, according to the calculations I have since made, I had travelled much more than three quarters of the way from the earth to the moon, I suddenly found myself falling head first, although I had not somersaulted in any fashion. I would not, indeed, have noticed this, if I had not felt my head taking the weight of my body. I was, in fact, quite certain that I was not falling back towards our world, for although I found myself between two moons, I could clearly observe that the farther I went from one, the nearer I came to the other, and I was convinced that the larger one was our globe, since, after I had been travelling for a day or two, the reflected light of the sun grew more distant and gradually the distinctions between different land masses and climates became blurred and it no

*It was popularly believed that, when the moon was on the wane, the bones of animals contained little or no marrow, since it was sucked out of them by the moon.

longer seemed to me like anything other than a great disc of gold. This made me think I was coming down towards the moon and this supposition was confirmed when I came to remember that I had only begun to fall after three quarters of the way.

‘For,’ I said to myself, ‘this body, being smaller than our earth, must have a less extensive sphere of influence and in consequence I have felt the pull of its centre later.’

At last, after I had been falling for a very long time—or so I presumed, for the violence of my precipitation made observation difficult—the next thing I can remember is finding myself under a tree, entangled with two or three large branches which I had shattered in my fall, and with my face moist from an apple which had been crushed against it.

2.
The earthly paradise

FORTUNATELY this place was the earthly paradise, as you will soon find out, and the tree upon which I fell turned out to be the Tree of Life itself. So you can easily judge that, but for this stroke of luck, I should have been killed a thousand times over. I have often reflected since then upon the popular belief which claims that when one falls from a great height, one is suffocated before making contact with the ground, and I have concluded from my own experience that this is false—unless the vital juice of the fruit which had trickled into my mouth actually recalled my soul before it had gone far from my corpse, while this was still warm and disposed to the functions of life. In fact my pain departed as soon as I reached the ground and before it had even left its mark upon my memory, while the hunger, which had greatly tormented me during my journey, gave way to only the faintest recollection that I had lost it.

When I got up, I had hardly had time to observe the

broadest of four great rivers, which flow together to form a lake, before the invisible essence of the herbs which exhale their fragrance over this country came to delight my nostrils and I discovered that the stones were neither hard nor uneven and that they were careful to soften themselves when one walked on them. I came first to a cross-roads where five avenues met, in which the trees were so exceedingly tall that they seemed to be holding a garden of foliage aloft in the sky. As I lifted my eyes from the roots to the topmost branches and let them fall from the summit to the foot, I began to wonder whether the ground supported them or if they did not themselves carry the ground suspended from their roots. Their crowns, proudly aloft, also seemed as if they were bowed down under the weight of the celestial spheres, so that one would think they sustained their load only with groaning limbs. Their boughs, uplifted to embrace heaven, showed how they prayed to the stars for the purest benignity of their influences and received them before any of their innocence had been lost in the bed of the elements.

On all sides there the flowers, which have no other gardener than nature, exhale a breath so sweet, though they are wild, that it both pricks and satisfies the nostrils. There, neither the crimson of a rose on the briar nor the brilliant azure of a violet beneath the brambles leave one any freedom of choice, for each enforces the judgement that it is lovelier than the other. There the spring makes up all the seasons. No venomous plant germinates there, whose preservation is not betrayed by its very birth. The streams recount their travels in a pleasant murmur to the pebbles. A thousand little feathered throats make the woods there ring with the sound of their melodious songs and the fluttering assembly of these divine musicians is so ubiquitous that it seems as if every leaf in the woods had adopted the shape and tongue of a nightingale, and even the echo takes so much pleasure in their tunes that, to hear her repeating them, you would think she desired to learn them by heart.

Beside this wood there are two meadows to be seen. Their
