I tried to jerk the bridle of my horse free from his grip, but I was choking with fits of laughter, which took away all my strength. Added to that, some fifty villagers came out from behind a hedge, crawling on their knees and making themselves hoarse with singing the Kyrie Eleison. When they were quite near, four of the most robust of them grasped me by the collar, after first dipping their hands in a basin of holy water, which the servant from the presbytery was holding for that purpose. As soon as I had been seized, Master Jean appeared, devoutly removed his stole and garrotted me with it. Next a mob of women and children arrived and, despite all my struggles, they stitched me into a sheet. I was, indeed, so well wrapped up in it that only my head could be seen, and in this outfit they took me off to Toulouse, as if they were carrying me to the family vault.

One man would shout that if they had not done this there would have been a famine, because when they met me I was going out to cast a spell on the crops as sure as anything. Then I would hear another moaning that the sheep-pox had only broken out in his flock after I had struck him on the shoulder one Sunday, coming out of Vespers. But what made me feel some inclination to laugh, despite all the mishaps that had befallen me, was a young peasant girl calling in terror after her betrothed, alias the phantom, who had taken my horse from me (for you must know that the clown had mounted astride it and was already spurring it on in good earnest, as if it were his own).

‘You wretch!’ screeched his beloved. ‘Have you only one eye in your head? Can’t you see that the magician’s horse is blacker than coal and it is Satan himself, carrying you off to the Sabbath?’

Our rustic tumbled off over the croup in alarm and so my
horse was given the freedom of the fields.

‘They next discussed whether to lay hands on the mule and decided that they would. They ripped open the package, but when they came upon the Physics of Monsieur Descartes in the first volume they looked into and perceived all the circles, which this philosopher employs to show the movement of each planet, they all howled with one voice that these were the rings I drew to call up Beelzebub. The one who was holding it dropped it in apprehension and unfortunately it fell open at a page where the properties of the loadstone are explained. I say unfortunately, because at the place of which I am speaking there is a picture of this metallic stone in which the little bodies that stand out from its mass to catch hold of the iron are represented like arms. Hardly had one of the rogues perceived it, when I heard him bawling that this was the toad which had been found in the trough in his cousin Fiacre’s stable when his horses died. At these words the ones who had seemed the most valiant hid their hands in their breasts or plunged them into their pockets. Master Jean, for his part, shouted at the top of his voice that they must beware of touching anything, that all the books were nothing but black magic and the mule was a devil. The mob, thus frightened, allowed the mule to depart in peace, but I saw Mathurine, the parish priest’s servant girl, driving it towards the presbytery stable, for fear that it might go into the churchyard and pollute the grass of the departed.

It was at least seven o’clock in the evening when we arrived at a small town, where, in order to refresh me, they dragged me to the gaol. The reader would not believe me if I said that they buried me in a hole, but this account is as near as any could be to the truth, for with a single pirouette I could make a tour of the entire premises. In short, nobody who saw me in that place could fail to take me for a lighted candle under a cupping glass. When my gaoler first threw me into this cave, I said to him: ‘If you are giving me this stone garment for a suit, it is too big, but if it is for a tomb, it is too tight. One can only count the days here by nights and out of my five senses, I am left with the use of but two, those of smell and touch: the one to make me aware of the stenches of my prison and the other to render it palpable to me. Indeed I confess I should believe I were damned, if I did not know that no innocent people enter hell.’

At the word ‘innocent’, my gaoler burst out laughing. ‘Why, upon my soul,’ he said, ‘then you are truly one of our people? For I have never kept any but them under lock and key!’

es other compliments of this nature, the good fellow took the trouble to search me. I do not know what his intention was, but from the diligence which he employed I conjecture that it was for my own good. His researches were fruitless, since I had slipped my gold into my hose during the battle of Diabolas,and when, at the conclusion of a most exact anatomy, he found himself as empty-handed as before, I nearly died of fear, for he came near to dying of grief.

‘Ho! Damn it!’ he roared, foaming at the mouth, ‘I knew he was a sorcerer the moment I set eyes on him! He isas skint as the devil! Go to, go to, my friend,’ he continued. ‘Look to your conscience in good time! ’

He had hardly finished these words when I heard the jingling of a bunch of keys, from which he was selecting the key to my cell. He had his back turned, which is why I drew three pistoles dexterously from their hiding place, fearing that he might take some revenge for the unhappiness of his visit, and said to him: ‘Monsieur le Concierge, here is a pistole. I beg you to have a morsel brought to me; I have not eaten since eleven o’clock.’

He took it most graciously and protested to me that my misfortune touched him. When I perceived that his heart was softened, I continued: ‘Here is another, in acknowledgement of the trouble which I am ashamed to give you.’

He opened his ear, his heart, and his hand and I added, counting out three of them instead of two, that, with the third one, I begged him to set one of his fellows beside me to keep me company because the unhappy must fear solitude.
