The constables that led me out to my punishment were four dozen condors and as many griffins, which went in front, and behind these flew a solemn procession of crows, croaking out something lugubrious; and in the distance I thought I heard owls replying to them.

As we left the place where judgement had been passed on me, two birds of paradise, which had been given the task of assisting me to make a good end, came and sat upon my shoulders.

Although my mind was greatly disturbed at the time with horror at the step I was about to take, I have nevertheless remembered most of the arguments with which they tried to console me.

‘Death,’ they told me (putting their beaks into my ear), ‘is doubtless no great misfortune, since nature, our good mother, subjects all her children to it; and it cannot be an event of much significance, since it can come at any moment and from such trivial causes. For if life were as excellent as all that, we should not have the power to withhold it; and if death brought in its wake consequences of the importance you imagine, we should not have the power to inflict it. On the contrary, it seems very likely that since animals begin their lives at play, they end them in a similar manner.

‘I am speaking to you thus because your soul is not immortal, like ours, and you may fairly consider that when you die, everything dies with you. But you should not be distressed to be doing sooner what some of your fellow creatures will be doing later. They are in a worse position than you, for if death is a misfortune, it is only one to those who have it to look forward to. Unlike yourself, who have no more than an hour to wait, they will have to endure fifty or sixty years in a state of being able to die. Besides, tell me: the unborn are not unhappy, are they? Well, you are going to be like someone who has not been born. In the twinkling of an eye after the end of your life you will be what you were a twinkling of an eye before it began, and once this twinkling of an eye is past, you will be as long dead as someone who died a thousand centuries ago.

‘But in any case, supposing that life is a blessing, cannot the same conjunction amidst the infinity of time, which caused you to be, some day cause you to be once again? Cannot the matter, which, by dint of mixing itself up, finally arrived at the quantity, state, and arrangement necessary to the construction of your being, mix itself up once again and arrive at a disposition such that you feel yourself to exist once more?

‘““Yes, but ——” you will say to me, “I should not remember having existed before.” But, my dear brother, what does that matter, provided you can feel that you exist now? For have you not a good chance of thinking of the same arguments again, to console yourself for the loss of your life, as I am now putting before you?

“These are considerations powerful enough to make you drink this cup of bitterness patiently, but I still have others, even more weighty, which will actually induce you to crave it. You must, my dear brother, accept the fact that as you and the other brutes are material, and as death, rather than destroying matter, does no more than rearrange its economy, you may be quite sure that when you cease to be what you are, you will begin to be something else. And even if you then become nothing more than a clod of earth or a stone, you will still be something less wicked than a man. But I have a secret to reveal to you, that I would not want any of my fellows to hear me utter: this is that in being eaten, as you will be, by our little birds, you will pass into their substance. Yes, you will have the honour of contributing, however blindly, to the intellectual operations of our flies and—though you cannot think for yourself—you will at least share in the glory of helping them to think!’

At about this stage in the homily we arrived at the place
appointed for my punishment.

There were four trees of the same height very close together and almost equidistant, and on top of each of them a tall heron was perched. I was brought down from my seat on the black ostrich and a number of cormorants lifted me up to where the four herons were waiting for me. These birds, facing one another, each one firmly supported by its tree, wound their necks (which were of a prodigious length) about me like ropes, two round my arms and two round my legs. They bound me so tightly that although each of my limbs was only held fast by a single one of their necks, I was quite powerless to move a muscle.

They were due to remain in this position for a long time, for I heard the cormorants which had lifted me being ordered to go and catch some fish to stuff into the herons’ beaks.

We were still waiting for the flies, because they had not cleft the air with a flight as powerful as ours. But it was not long before we heard them.

The first thing they did was to divide up my body between them, and this distribution was so cunningly arranged that my eyes were allotted to the bees, so that they should sting them as they ate them; my ears to the bumble bees, so that they should deafen and devour them at the same time; my shoulders to the fleas, so that they should nibble into them with bites that would make me itch; and so on with the rest. It was as if all the atoms of which the air is composed had turned into flies, for I was barely touched by two or three rays of light—which would seem to have donned a disguise in order to make their way through to me—so tightly packed and close to my flesh were these battalions.

But just as each one of them was already choosing the spot it fancied to bite, I suddenly saw them fall back abruptly and amidst the confusion of countless thunderclaps, which re- sounded to the heavens, I several times made out the word:
‘Reprieve! Reprieve! Reprieve!’

Two turtle doves flew up to me. On their arrival all the erim apparatus of my death was dismantled. I felt my herons relaxing the coils of their long necks, which entwined me, and my spreadeagled body hurtling down from the top of the four trees to the roots at their base.
