“The grace of the Most High made up for this by inspiring Enoch to reflect that the fire of heaven descended upon the burnt offerings of the just and of those who were pleasing in the sight of the Lord and, according to the words of His mouth, “The odour of the sacrifices of the just has risen to my nostrils.” One day when this divine fire was rushing down to consume a victim he was offering to the Eternal One, he filled two great jars with the fumes which it gave off, sealed them hermetically with clay and attached them to himself under his armpits. The vapour tried to rise straight up towards God, and since it could only have penetrated through the metal by a miracle, it immediately drove the jars upwards and in this way they carried the holy man up with them. When he had risen as high as the moon, he was apprised by an almost supernatural access of joy that this was the earthly paradise, where his grandfather had once lived.

‘He promptly unfastened the vessels, which he had tied round his shoulders like wings and was lucky enough to be barely eight yards in the air above the moon when he parted company with his floats. This was still a great enough height for him to have been severely injured, had it not been for the vast spread of his robe, which was filled with wind, as well as the ardour of the Fire of Charity, which combined to support him until he had set foot upon the ground. As for the two jars, they continued to rise until God set them in the Firmament, where they have remained; and they are what you call the Sign of the Balance, and daily demonstrate to us that they are still filled with the odours from the sacrifice of a just man, by the favourable influence they have upon the horoscope of Louis the Just, who was born when the Balance was in the ascendant.

‘But Enoch was still not in this garden; he only arrived here some time afterwards. It happened at the time when the Flood was unleashed, for the waters which engulfed your world rose to so prodigious a height that the Ark was drifting about in the heavens near the moon. ‘The humans perceived our globe through the window, but the reflected light from this great opaque body had become weak, since they were near enough to share in it, and they all believed it was part of the earth which had not been submerged. Only one of Noah’s daughters, called Achab—perhaps because she had noticed that the higher the ship rose, the nearer they drew to this star —clamorously maintained that it was without doubt the moon. In vain it was put to her that when soundings were taken they had only found four fathoms of water. She replied that the sounding-lead must have struck a whale’s back, which they had mistaken for the earth and that, for her part, she was certain it was the moon itself where they were about to land. In the end, as everyone adopts the opinions of their fellows, all the other women persuaded themselves of this too. And now, though forbidden by the menfolk, they begin to let down the boat into the sea. Achab was the most daring of them and wanted to be the first to brave the dangers. She flung herself nimbly into it and all her sex would have joined her if a wave had not separated the boat from the ship.

“Vainly they shouted after her, calling her “lunatic” a hundred times and protesting that she would be the cause of all women being one day reproached for having a quarter of the moon in their heads: she merely laughed at them. And so she floated away from the world. The animals followed her example, for the majority of the birds, who felt their wings strong enough and were impatient with the first prison in which anyone had ever restrained their liberty, made their way there. Even the bravest of the quadrupeds began swimming. Nearly a thousand had got away before Noah’s sons could close the stable doors, which were being held open by the multitude of escaping animals. Most of them reached this new world. As for the skiff, it came to rest on a very pleasant shore where the great-hearted Achab landed. Happy to have recognized that this land was indeed the moon, she had no desire to go back to her boat and rejoin her brothers. She dwelt for some time in a cave and as she was walking one day, considering whether she should be vexed at having lost the company of her kinsfolk or glad of it, she caught sight of a man knocking down acorns. Overjoyed by this encounter, she flew to embrace him. She received as good as she gave, for it was even longer since the old man had seen a human face. This was Enoch the Just.

‘They lived together, and if the impious nature of his children and the arrogance of his wife had not driven him to seek refuge in the woods, they would have spun out the thread of their days together in all the sweetness with which God blesses the marriages of the just. There, in the wildest retreats of those dreadful solitudes, the good old man used every day to offer up to God a purified spirit and his heart as a sacrifice, until one day an apple fell from the Tree of Knowledge, which is in this garden, as you know, into the river beside which it is planted and was carried out of paradise by the current to a place where poor Enoch was fishing in order to keep body and soul together. The fine fruit was caught in the net. He ate it. At once he knew where the earthly paradise was and, thanks to secrets such as you could not conceive, unless, like him, you had eaten of the Apple of Knowledge, he came to live here.
