With a smile he replied to me as follows: ‘I was forgetting, O my son, to reveal to you a secret of which you cannot have been informed. You must know that when Eve and her husband had eaten of the forbidden apple, God punished the serpent which had tempted them, by imprisoning it in a man’s body. Since then no human creature has been born who does not, in punishment for the crime of his first father, nourish a serpent in his belly, descended from this first one. You call them guts and believe them necessary to the functions of life. Learn that they are nothing else but serpents, doubled upon themselves in many coils. When you hear your entrails complaining, it is the serpent hissing and—in accordance with its gluttonous temperament, which once made it incite the first man to take a bite too many—asking to be fed in its turn. For in order to punish you, God desired to make you mortal like the other animals and had you plagued with this insatiable beast, so that if you should give it too much to eat, you would choke yourselves and if you should deny it its pittance, when it is starving and gnawing at your stomach with invisible teeth, it would scream, rage, disgorge that venom which your doctors call bile and heat you up so much with the poison it injects into your arteries, that you would swiftly be consumed by it. And for the ultimate proof that your guts are a serpent inside your body, remember that such were found in the tombs of Aesculapius, of Scipio, of Alexander, of Charles the Hammer and of Edward of England, still feeding off the corpses of their hosts.’

‘Yes indeed,’ I said, interrupting him, ‘I have noticed how, as this serpent is always trying to escape from man’s body, you can see its head and neck emerging at the bottom of our bellies. Furthermore, God does not suffer man alone to be tormented by it: it was His will that it should rise up against woman to inject its poison into her and that the swelling should last for nine months after the bite. And the proof that I speak according to the word of the Lord is that He curses the serpent, saying that in vain will it cause woman to stumble by hardening itself against her, for in the end she will bruise its head.’

I would have continued with these trifles, but Elijah prevented me. ‘Consider,’ he said, ‘that this place is holy.’

Then he fell silent for a time, as if to recall the point he had reached, after which he spoke these words: ‘I only partake of the Fruit of Life once in every hundred years. Its juice has a taste whose character is somewhat akin to that of wine. I believe it was the apple Adam ate which made our forefathers live so long, because something of its energy had passed into their seed, until it was finally extinguished in the waters of the Flood. The Tree of Knowledge is planted opposite. Its fruit is covered with a rind which induces ignorance in whoever tastes it. The intellectual virtues of this learned food are conserved beneath the thickness of this peel. In the days when God had driven Adam out of this blessed land, He rubbed his gums with the peel for fear that he might find his way back. From that moment his wits wandered for more than fifteen years and he forgot everything to such a point that neither he nor any of his descendants until Moses even remembered the Creation. But the remaining effects of this sluggish rind were finally dissipated by the warmth and the brilliance of the genius of that Great Prophet.

‘By happy chance I addressed myself to one of these apples which was ripe enough to have shed its skin and hardly had my saliva moistened it when I was enveloped by universal philosophy. It seemed to me that an infinite number of little eyes plunged into my head and I knew how to speak to the Lord.

‘When I have since reflected upon my miraculous ascent here, I have readily believed that I could not have overcome the vigilance of the seraphim which God has commanded to guard this paradise, simply by means of the hidden virtues of a natural body; but because He is pleased to make use of secondary causes, I came to believe that He inspired me to think of this means of entry, even as it was His will to use Adam’s ribs to make him a wife, although He could have made her out of clay just as well as him.

‘I spent a long time walking in the garden, but since the Angel Doorkeeper of the place was my chief host, I had a desire to greet him. My journey was accomplished in an hour’s walking, for at the end of this time I arrived in a country where the conjunction of a thousand flashes of lightning produced a brilliance so blinding that one could only see darkness.

‘I had not properly recovered from this occurrence when I beheld a handsome youth in front of me. “I am the Archangel you are seeking,” he told me. “I have just read in God that He suggested to you the means of coming here, where He desires you to await His will.” He spoke to me about many subjects and told me, among other things, that the light which seemed to have alarmed me was nothing to be afraid of. It could be seen almost every evening when he was making his rounds, because, to avoid being surprised by the sorcerers who enter invisibly everywhere, he was obliged to brandish his flaming sword all round the earthly paradise and this brillior came from the flashes of lightning produced by his

ade.

‘“Those which you observe from your world,” he added, “are caused by me. If you sometimes notice them from a long way off, it is because the clouds in a distant clime are disposed so as to receive their impression and reflect these faint images of fire down to you, just as a vapour situated in a different way is disposed to produce a rainbow. I will instruct you no further, for the Apple of Knowledge is not far from here; as soon as you have eaten of it you will be as learned as I am. But above all beware of taking the wrong one: the majority of the fruits which hang upon this plant are covered with a rind which, if you taste it, will cause you to sink lower than the lowest man, while the inside will raise you to the level of the angels.” ’
