With these words he fell silent and our host’s son took up the conversation as follows: ‘Permit me,’ he said to my demon, ‘since, thanks to the trouble you have taken, I am acquainted with the origin, history, customs, and philosophy of the world of this little man, to add something to what you have said and to show that children are in no way indebted to their fathers for their birth, because their fathers were obliged by their consciences to beget them.

“The very narrowest philosophy in their world admits that it is better to die—since in order to die one must have lived— than never to exist at all. Therefore since, if I do not give substance to this nonentity, I put it into a state worse than death; in not bringing it into the world I am committing a worse crime than killing it. Now if you had cut your son’s throat, O my little man, you would consider yourself guilty of unforgivable parricide. It would indeed be monstrous, but it is even more execrable not to give any existence at all to someone who could have received it. For this child, whom you thus permanently deprive of the light of day, would at least have had the satisfaction of enjoying it for a space of time. Of course we know that he is only deprived of it for a few centuries, but then if you maliciously prevent these poor little nothings (out of which you might have made your King forty good soldiers) from coming into the world and leave them corrupting in your loins, you run the risk of an apoplexy which will choke you.

“Let no man answer by singing the praises of virginity; this honour is just so much empty vapour. For despite all the veneration with which it is idolized by the mob, it is still no more than a recommendation, even among your own people. But not to kill and not to make one’s son (by not making him at all) more wretched than a dead man—these are commandments. For this reason I am greatly astonished, seeing that in the world you come from continence is held to be preferable to carnal intercourse, that God has not arranged for you to be born from the dew in the month of May like mushrooms, or at least, like crocodiles, from the greasy slime of the earth in the heat of the sun. None the less He only sends eunuchs among you by accident. He does not snatch away the genitals from your monks, your priests, nor your cardinals. You will tell me that they were given them by nature. Yes, but He is the Lord of nature, and if He had regarded this part as dangerous to their salvation He would have commanded it to be cut off, just as He commanded the Jews to do with their foreskins in the ancient law.

‘But such fancies are too ridiculous! I ask you, is there any place upon your body more sacred or more accursed than any other? Why do I commit a sin when I touch myself on the part in the middle and not when I touch my ear or my heel? Is it because of the titillation I feel? Then I should not relieve myself at the privy either, for that cannot be done without a certain kind of pleasure. Nor should the devout lift themselves up to the contemplation of God, for their imagination enjoys great delight in this. Indeed, when I see how much the religion of your country is against nature and jealous of all the gratifications of men, I am astonished that your priests have not made it a crime for you to scratch yourselves, on account of the agreeable pain you feel in doing it.

‘For all that, I have noticed that far-sighted Nature has given all great men, the valiant and the clever, an inclination towards the delights of love, as witness Samson, David, Hercules, Caesar, Hannibal, Charlemagne. Was it in order that they might reap the organ of this pleasure from themselves with a blow of a bill-hook? Alas, she even found a way under a wash tub and debauched Diogenes, thin, ugly and lousy as he was, and constrained him to heave sighs, reeking of carrots, for Lais. Doubtless nature treated him in this way because she feared there was a shortage of honest men in the world.

‘Let us conclude from all this that your father was compelled by his conscience to allow you to see the light of day, and though he might think he had greatly obliged you by making you, while gratifying himself, he has in essence given you no more than an ordinary bull gives the cows ten times a day for his own pleasure.’

‘You are wrong,’ my demon then broke in, ‘to want to regulate the wisdom of God. It is true that He has forbidden us the excess of this pleasure, but how do you know He did not want it this way, so that the difficulties we encounter in fighting this passion might make us worthy of the glory He has in store for us? Or how do you know His purpose was not to whet our appetites? How do you know He did not foresee that if the young were abandoned to the impulses of the flesh, overfrequent coition would weaken their seed and bring the world to an end with the great-great-nephews of the first man? How do you know He was not seeking to prevent the earth’s fertility being exhausted by the needs of so many hungry mouths? How do you know, lastly, if He did not wish to make it appear quite unreasonable in order to reward just those who had faith in His Word contrary to all semblance of reason?’

This reply did not satisfy the young host, so far as I could judge, for he wagged his head at it three or four times. But our

common mentor fell silent because the meal was impatient to
take flight.

We stretched ourselves out upon very soft mattresses covered with vast carpets. A young serving man took the elder of our philosophers and led him into a separate little room. My demon called out to him that he must come back and join us as soon as he had eaten.

This whim of eating apart made me curious to ask the reason for it. ‘He has no taste for the odour of meat,’ he told me, ‘or even that of vegetables, unless they have died a natural death, because he believes them capable of feeling pain.’

‘Iam not so surprised,’ I replied,‘ at his abstaining from flesh and all things that have once been sentient beings, for in our world the Pythagoreans and even some anchorite saints have adopted this regimen. But not to dare to cut a cabbage, for example, for fear of hurting it, seems to me totally ridiculous.’

‘And I,’ replied my demon, ‘find his opinion very plausible.
