‘Let him now answer me, I beg him, this common blockhead who will not even believe he is a man until a learned doctor tells him so! Supposing there is only one substance, as I believe I have sufficiently proved, how does it come about that, by condensing itself, a lump of earth can turn into a stone? Are the particles of this stone fitted inside one another so that where one grain of sand is already located, another can occupy the same space? Such a thing would be impossible, even according to their own principles, since bodies do not 4penetrate one another—and yet this matter must have been drawn together and, if you like, abridged. The particles have therefore occupied some space which was not occupied before.

‘You may say it is incomprehensible that there should be nothingness in the universe, that we should be partly composed of nothing. Well, why ever not? Is not the whole universe surrounded by nothingness? And since you grant me this much, confess, then, that it is just as easy for the universe to have nothingness within it as around it.

‘Now I am well aware that you are going to ask me why a vessel of water bursts when the water freezes and contracts, if it is not to prevent a vacuum being created. But my answer is that it only happens because the air above it, which is drawn towards the centre of the globe, just as much as earth and water, encounters a vacant hostelry on its path through this territory and goes in to lodge there. If it finds the portals of this vessel—that is to say the channels leading to the pocket of vacuum—too narrow, long and tortuous, it satisfies its impatience to reach its berth sooner by smashing it open.

‘But without amusing myself by replying to all these objections, I will venture to state that, if there were no vacuums, there would be no movement, or else it would be necessary to admit that bodies penetrate one another. For it would be ridiculous to believe that when a fly pushes a parcel of air aside with its wings, this parcel makes another recoil in front of it, and this second one yet another, and that in this manner the agitation of a flea’s little toe produces a hump on the other side of the world!

‘When these people are hard pressed to explain this, they have recourse to rarefaction. But when a body becomes rarefied how, in good faith, can one particle of its mass move farther from another particle without leaving emptiness in between them? Otherwise would not the two particles which have just moved apart have to have occupied the same space as a third one—and thus all three would have penetrated one another? I expect you will ask me how, in that case, we can make water rise upwards, against its inclination, by means of a tube, a syringe, or a pump. My answer is that it is raped. It is not fear of a vacuum that obliges it to change direction but, being fused with the air in an imperceptible nuance, it rises when the air is drawn up, since this clutches it in a tight embrace.

“That is not a very thorny point to grasp when you understand the perfect cycle and subtle interconnection of the elements. For if you examine attentively the slime that makes the marriage between earth and water, you will find that it is at this stage neither earth nor water but the honest broker making a contract between these two enemies. Similarly, water and air each send one another a mist, which partakes of the characters of both and makes peace between them, and air is reconciled with fire by means of a mediating exhalation which unites them.’

I believe he would have continued speaking; but they brought us our food and, because we were hungry, I closed my ears to his speeches, the better to open sy stomach to the meats they had set before us.

I remember that another time, when we were philosophizing (for we both had little taste for conversation upon low topics), he said to me: ‘It distresses me deeply to see a mind of the stamp of yours infected with the errors of the common herd. You must know that despite the pedantry of Aristotle, with which your classrooms in France today resound, everything is in everything. That is to say, for example, that in water there is fire and in fire, water; air contains earth and earth, air. Although this opinion may make the academics open their eyes as wide as saucers, it is, in fact, easier to prove it than it is to convince them. For I ask them, first of all, if water does not engender fish. If they deny me this, let them dig a ditch and fill it with the juice of the water jug (which they may also pass through a sieve, to avoid the objections of the blind); and if they find no fish there after some time, I am willing to drink all the water they poured into it. But if they do find any, as I have no doubt they will, it is a conclusive
proof that it contains salt and fire.

‘It follows that it is not a very difficult undertaking now to discover water in fire. Even if they choose the form of fire which is the most detached from matter, such as comets, there is still always a great deal of water in them. For if the oily humour from which they are created, reduced to sulphur by the heat of the reaction which sets them alight, did not meet some resistance to its violence in the cold humidity which tempers and combats it, it would swiftly be consumed like a flash of lightning.

‘That there is air in earth they will not now deny—or else they have never heard of the terrible earthquakes which so recently convulsed the mountains of Sicily. Apart from this, we can see that earth is completely porous, down to the grains of sand which compose it. However, no one has yet said that the holes are filled with nothing, so they will not find it improper for the air to make its dwelling there. It remains for me to prove that there is earth in the air, but it is hardly worth my while to take the trouble, since it is demonstrated to you every time you see the legions of atoms falling on your heads which are so numerous that they smother arithmetic.

‘But let us turn from simple to composite bodies. These will offer me much more common examples and will show that all things are contained in all things and do not change into one another, as your peripatetics are always babbling. For I will tell them to their beards that the principal substances combine, separate, and combine again in such a way that what was created water by the Maker of the world in His wisdom will always remain water.
