To this argument, however, I found the objection that, since the constitution which makes life is composed not only of natural heat, but also of radical moisture—to which this heat must be attached, as the flame is to the oil of a lamp—the rays from this furnace of life could not by themselves nourish the soul, unless they encountered some oily matter to hold them fast.

I immediately overcame this difficulty, however, when I noted that the radical moisture and the natural heat of our bodies are one and the same thing. For what is called ‘moisture’, whether in animals or in the sun—that great animus of the universe—is nothing but a flow of bodies more continuous on account of their mobility; and what is called ‘heat’ is a light drizzle of atoms of fire, which appear rarefied on account of their interruption. But even if radical moisture and heat were two distinct things, it is still true that moisture would not be necessary for life so close to the sun, since the only function of this moisture in living creatures is to hold the heat, which would otherwise be spent too quickly and not replaced in time, and I was in no danger of running short of natural warmth in a region, where more of the little bodies of flame, which make life, were joining my being than leaving it.

Another thing which may cause surprise is why my approach to this flaming globe did not burn me up, since I had almost come within range of the full activity of its sphere; but here is the reason for it. It is not, strictly speaking, fire itself which burns, but a grosser matter, which fire drives here and there by the thrusts of its volatile nature. The powder of fine sparks, which I call ‘fire’, has its own motion, but very likely depends for all its effects on the roundness of the other atoms. For they tickle, warm, or burn according to the shape of the bodies with which they combine. So straw does not produce as fierce a flame as wood, and wood burns less violently than iron. This is due to the fact that fire in iron, wood, and straw, although it is itself the same substance, acts differently according to the diversity of the bodies which it activates. That is why in straw, fire (this almost spiritual dust), being only combined with a soft material, is less destructive. In wood, whose substance is more compact, it does more damage. And when it penetrates iron, whose mass is almost completely solid and bound together by angular particles, it consumes what is thrown on to it in an instant. All these observations are so familiar that it will come as no surprise that I should draw near to the sun without being burnt. For what burns is not fire, but the matter to which it is attached, and the fire of the sun cannot be combined with any other matter.

After all, do we not experience how joy (which isa fire that merely causes the circulation of an airy mixture of blood, whose greatly rarefied particles brush softly against the membranes of our flesh) titillates and arouses an indefinable blind voluptuousness? This pleasure, or let me rather call it this first step on the way to pain, does not go as far as to threaten the body with death but only to make us feel a desire which causes our spirit an emotion, which we call ‘joy’. That is not to say that fever, although it has quite contrary effects, is not a fire just as much as joy. But it is a fire combined with a substance, whose particles have horns. Such is the black bile or melancholy, which goes thrusting its crooked points wherever its mobile nature sends it, piercing, cutting, and lashing, and by means of this agitation produces what is called ‘fever heat’.

But this string of proofs is quite unnecessary. The most everyday experiences are quite sufficient to convince the obdurate, and I have no time to lose. I must think of myself. Iam still following Phaeton’s example, in the midst of a chariot race which I cannot abandon and in which, if I make one false move, all nature together cannot save me.

I was able to recognize very distinctly that, as I had previously suspected, on my way up to the moon, it is indeed the earth which revolves about the sun from east to west and not the other way round. For after France I saw the foot of the boot of Italy, then the Mediterranean Sea, then Greece, then the Bosphorus, the Black Sea, Persia, the Indies, China, and finally Japan, passing opposite the hole in my box, one after the other: and some hours after my take-off, the whole of the

Pacific Ocean had spun by and the continent of America had
taken its place.

I could make out these revolutions quite clearly and I remember that a good deal later I even saw Europe reappearing on the scene, although I could no longer tell the separate countries apart, since my altitude had become too great. As I journeyed on, I passed several earths like ours, now to the left and now to the right of my route and if I came into their spheres of influence, albeit but slightly, I would feel myself wavering. But the vigorous speed of my flight overcame the force of these attractions.

I skirted the moon, which was at that time situated between the sun and the earth, and left Venus to my right. With regard to this star, the astronomy of the ancients has been so insistent in preaching that the planets are heavenly bodies which revolve about the earth, that we moderns dare not doubt it. And yet I remarked that during the whole of the time in which Venus appeared beyond the sun, about which she revolves, I saw her always as a crescent. But when she had completed her revolution, I observed that as she passed from behind it, her horns drew close to one another and her black belly grew gold again. Now this variation of light and shadow shows quite clearly that the planets are, like the moon and the earth, globes without their own brilliance, only capable of reflecting what they borrow.
