Ravished by my prodigality, he promised me all things, embracing my knees, declaimed against justice, told me he saw clearly that I had enemies but that I should come out of it with my honour untarnished, that I must have a good courage and that, besides all this, he undertook to have my cuffs laundered within three days. I thanked him very solemnly for his courtesy and after a thousand embraces, with which he came near to strangling me, this dear friend bolted and barred the door.

l |
In and out of prison

I was left all alone and very melancholy, my body doubled up on a pile of powdered straw, which was not so fine, however, that over fifty rats were not grinding it up still smaller. The roof, the walls, and the floor were composed of six tombstones, so that, having death above, below, and all about me, I was left in no doubt as to my burial. The cold slime of the slugs and the sticky venom of the toads trickled on to my face. The lice there had teeth longer than their bodies. Thus I found the complaint I suffered from was a stone, which harmed me none the less for being external to my body. Briefly, I think all I needed to be the complete Job was a wife and a potsherd.

I had survived the ordeal of two very painful hours there, however, when the sound of a whole gross of keys, added to that of the bolts on my door, aroused me from the contemplation of my misfortunes. Following this clatter I perceived, by the light of a lamp, a hulking great oaf. He dumped a basin between my legs and said: “There, there, don’t you fret your- self. There’s some cabbage soup as ever was. And ’tis all proper soup made by our mistress, and so, by my troth, as the saying goes, there’s not a drop of the grease has been took out of it.’

So saying, he plunged his five fingers right in to the bottom of the dish by way of invitation to me to do the same. I modelled myself on the original, for fear of discouraging him, and a light of joy came into his eye.

‘Dang it!’ he cried. ‘You are a good brother! They say there’s some of ’em don’t like you, Lord bless us. But I say they’re all traitors, yes, Lord help us, all traitors! Well, let them just come here and see for theirselves! Ah! Well enough. As long as there’s something, you’ve done your best and no one can do better than that!’

Two or three times I felt I was about to guffaw at his simplicity, but I was lucky enough to stop myself. I saw that fortune seemed to have offered me in this rogue a chance to regain my liberty. For this reason it was very important for me to cherish his good graces, for, as to my escaping by any other routes, the architect who built my prison had made several entrances to it, but he had forgotten to make a way out.

It was with all these considerations in mind that I addressed him as follows, in order to sound him out: ‘Is it not true, my big friend, that you are poor?’

‘Alas, sir,’ replied the clown, ‘if you had come from the fortune-teller itself, you could not have hit upon it better.’

‘Here, then,’ I went on, ‘take this pistole.’

I found his hand shaking so much when I put the coin into it that he could hardly close it. This beginning seemed to me a bad omen. However, I soon discovered from the fervour of his thanks that he had only been trembling with joy, which was my reason for continuing: ‘But if you should be the man to want to help me in the fulfilment of a vow that I have made, twenty pistoles (in addition to the salvation of your soul) would be just as much your own as your hat. For you must know that not a good quarter of an hour—in short, but a moment—before your arrival, an angel appeared to me and promised me to make the justice of my cause known, provided I go and have a mass said to Our Lady of this town at the High Altar tomorrow. I tried to excuse myself on the ground that I was too closely locked up, but he replied that a man would come, sent by the gaoler to keep me company, whom I would simply have to instruct in his part of leading me to the church and bringing me back to prison. I should recommend him to secrecy and unquestioning obedience on pain of dying within the space of one year, and if he should doubt my word I should tell him as a sign that he is a Brother of the Scapular Confraternity.’ (For the reader must know that beforehand I had glimpsed a scapular through a slit in his shirt which suggested the whole invention of this apparition to me.)

“Why, yes, to be sure, my good lord,’ he said, ‘I will do what the angel has commanded us. But it must be at nine o’clock then, because at that time our master will be in Toulouse for the betrothal of his son to the daughter of the public executioner. Lord save us, a hangman has just as good a name as a sheep tick! ‘They say she will have as many crowns from her father when she marries as you need for a king’s ransom. As you see, she is rich and pretty, but such things take care not to happen to a poor fellow. Alas! my good sir, you see...’ At this point I interrupted hastily, for, from the beginning of his digression, I anticipated a long string of red herrings.

After we had well and truly digested our plot, the oaf took leave of me. The next day he did not fail to come and exhume me, sharp on the promised hour. I left my clothes at the prison and fitted myself out with some rags, as we had agreed I should the night before, in order to avoid being recognized. As soon as we were in the open I did not forget to count him out his twenty pistoles. He looked at them hard, with very wide eyes. |

‘They are gold and fully up to weight,’ I told him, ‘I give
you my word.’

‘Hey, no sir,’ he replied to me, ‘I’m not thinking of that.

I’m thinking that Big Macé’s house is up for sale with its garden and its vine. I could get it easily for two hundred francs, but it will take a week to strike a bargain and I should like to beg you, my good sir, if it was your pleasure, not to let your pistoles turn into oak leaves until Big Macé has them well and truly counted and in his chest.’
