‘How so?’ said Campanella. ‘Do the laws of your country
command you to fear death?’

‘Yes,’ answered the woman. “They command everyone to do so, except for those who have been admitted to the College of Sages. For our magistrates have discovered from painful experience that a man who is not afraid of losing his own life is capable of taking everyone else’s.’

After some further exchanges which followed from these, Campanella sought to inform himself in more detail about the way of life of her country. He therefore asked her what the laws and customs of the Kingdom of Lovers were; but she excused herself from speaking about them, for the reason that, not having been born there and only half knowing them she was afraid of saying too little or too much about them.

‘It is true that I have come from that province,’ the woman continued, ‘but I am, like all my forebears, a native of the Kingdom of Truth. My mother bore me there and had no other children. She brought me up in that country until, when I was thirteen, the King commanded her, on the advice of the doctors, to take me to the Kingdom of Lovers (from whence I have just come) so that I might be raised in the Palace of Love and receive a gayer and gentler education than that of our country, which would make me more fertile than she had been. My mother took me there and put me into that house of pleasure.

‘I suffered a good deal before I had grown accustomed to their ways. At first these seemed very primitive, for, as you know, the opinions which we have imbibed with our mothers’ milk always seem to us the most reasonable, and I had only just arrived from the Kingdom of Truth, my native country.

‘I did not fail to appreciate that this Nation of Lovers lived much more gently and indulgently than ours, for although every man announced that the sight of me caused dangerous wounds, that my glances were deadly and that my eyes gave out a fire which consumed their hearts, yet the good nature of every one of them, especially the young men, was so great that they caressed me, kissed me, and embraced me, instead of taking revenge upon me for the harm I had done to them. I even grew angry with myself about the distress I was causing, so that, moved by pity, I one day revealed to them that I had resolved to take flight.

‘“But alas! How can we save you?” they all cried, throwing themselves at my neck and kissing my hands. “Your house is surrounded with water and the danger appears to be so great that, but for a miracle, you and we should certainly be drowned already.” ’ :

‘How so?’ I interrupted. ‘Is the Country of Lovers subject
to flooding?’

‘It must be said that it is,’ she answered me. ‘For one of my lovers (who would not have wished to deceive me—since he loved me) wrote to me that in his grief at my departure he had just wept an ocean of tears. A second I saw assured me that a wellspring of tears had flowed down his eyes for three days, and while I was cursing, for love of them, the fatal hour when they had first seen me, yet another of those that counted themselves among my slaves sent me a message to say that the previous night his eyes had brimmed over and caused a flood. I would have removed myself from this world, so as to be the cause of so many misfortunes no longer, but the messenger then added that his master had told him to assure me that there was nothing to fear because the furnace of his breast had dried up the flood. In short, you can imagine how aquatic the Kingdom of Lovers must be from the fact that they are only crying by halves there when nothing more than streams, fountains, and torrents issues from under their eyelids.

‘I was very worried about what device I could employ to escape from all these waters, which must surely engulf me. But one of my lovers, who was known as Green-eyes, advised me to tear out my heart and embark upon it. I should not be afraid of it being too small, since I had found a place in it for so many others, nor of it sinking to the bottom, since it was so light. All I needed to beware of was fire, because the substance of this vessel was highly inflammable. I should therefore set sail upon the sea of his tears; the blindfold of his love would serve me as a Sail and the favourable winds of his sighs, despite the storming of his rivals, would bring me safely to port.

‘I spent a long time wondering how I could put this enterprise into operation. The timidity natural to my sex restrained my daring, but finally I decided that if the thing were not possible, no man would be so insane as to advise it, least of all a lover to his mistress, and I plucked up courage.

‘I took hold of a knife and split open my breast and indeed I was already rummaging in the wound with both hands and identifying my heart with a fearless gaze, preparatory to snatching it out, when a young man who loved me appeared on the scene. He wrested the weapon from me and asked me the motive for this action, which he called “desperate.” I told him the story of it and a quarter of an hour later I was very surprised to learn that he had taken Green-eyes to court. But the magistrates were perhaps afraid of paying too much regard to precedent or to the novelty of the case and passed it on to the Parliament of the Kingdom of the Just. There, in addition to perpetual banishment, he was condemned to go and end his days as a slave on the lands of the Republic of Truth, and his descendants, down to the fourth generation, were forbidden ever to set foot in the Province of Lovers. He was furthermore ordered never to use a hyperbole again upon pain of death.

‘After that I came to have a great deal of affection for the young man who had saved me and, whether on account of this good office or of his passion for me, when his apprenticeship and mine were ended and he asked me to be one of his wives, I did not refuse him.

‘We have always lived happily together and would do still, had he not, as I told you, killed one of my children twice over, for which I am going to ask vengeance in the Kingdom of Philosophers.’

We were very surprised, Campanella and I, by the deep silence this man observed. I therefore tried to console him, judging his profound taciturnity to be the offspring of a most profound sorrow, but his wife prevented me.
