‘Very well,’ he said. ‘Since you wish it, your ears will be deprived not merely of the nightingale’s beautiful songs, but of almost all its history, for I can only tell you the part of it which has come to my knowledge. However you will have to be content with this sample, since even if I knew the whole of it, the brevity of our journey into its country, whither I am returning it, would not allow me to pursue my story any further.’

Having spoken thus, he leapt off my shoulder on to the ground. He then joined hands with all his little people and began to dance with them in a kind of figure, which I cannot describe, for nothing comparable has ever been seen. But hearken, peoples of the earth, to something I would not oblige you to believe, since even in the world where what you would call ‘miracles’ are but natural phenomena, what follows passes for a miracle! As soon as these little men had set themselves a-dancing, I seemed to feel their movements in myself and mine in theirs. I could not watch this dance without being perceptibly drawn from where I stood as if by a vortex which was spinning with its own momentum. All the parts of my body were agitated by che various movements of each of theirs and I would feel the same joy spreading across my face, which a similar action had caused to spread across theirs.

As the dance became more intense, the dancers were merged together with a stamping which grew much swifter and more imperceptible. It seemed that the aim of the ballet was to imitate an enormous giant, for as they drew nearer together and redoubled the speed of their movements, they blended so closely that all I could make out was a great luminous and half-transparent colossus, although my eyes could still see them entering into one another.

It was at that time that I began to be unable to distinguish one spinning creature from another on account of their rapid rotations, and also because these rotations were continually contracting as they approached the centre, and each vortex finally occupied so little space that it escaped my sight. However, I assume that the parts continued to draw closer, since this human mass, which had formerly been huge, gradually shrank to form a young man of medium stature, whose every limb was shaped with a symmetry, to which the greatest ideal of perfection has never attained. He was beautiful beyond all the loftiest dreams of the painters, but what I found quite marvellous was that the joining of all the component parts of this perfect microcosm took place in the twinkling of an eye. Some of the most agile of our little dancers had leaped up to the height and into the posture essential to the formation of the head; some, warmer and less refined, formed the heart; and some, much heavier, only went into the making of the bones, the flesh, and the fat.

When this tall, handsome young man was quite completed, although the swiftness of his construction had hardly left me any time to notice the stages in his progress, I saw the King of all those peoples, of whom he was a hotch-potch, entering through his mouth. It seems to me, furthermore, that he was inhaled into the body by its own respiration. All this mass of little men had not previously given any sign of life, but as soon as it had swallowed its little King, it no longer felt like anything but one being. He considered me for some time and having apparently collected himself as he looked at me, he drew near to me, caressed me, and gave me his hand.

‘And now, without injuring the delicacy of my lungs, I can tell you about the things you were so anxious to know,’ he said. “But it is reasonable enough, first of all, to reveal the hidden secrets of our origin. Know then that we are creatures native to the brightest regions of the sun. The most usual of our occupations and the most profitable is to travel through the vast countries of this great world. We observe with curiosity the customs of the nations, the character of the climates and the nature of anything which deserves our attention. Thus we are able to establish a certain science of what is.

“You must know that my vassals used to travel under my . leadership and that in order to have the leisure to scrutinize things more searchingly, we did not retain that conformation peculiar to our bodies, which cannot be perceived by your senses and the subtlety of which would have made us travel too fast, but turned ourselves into birds. At my command all my subjects had become eagles, and as for myself, for fear that they might grow weary, I transformed myself into a nightingale, in order to sweeten their task with the charms of music. I accompanied the rapid flight of my people without flying myself, for I was perched upon the head of one of my vassals, and we were continuing on our way as usual when a nightingale, which lived in a province of the opaque country which we were then crossing, astonished to see me in the power of an eagle (for it could not do otherwise than take us for our outward shapes), began to lament my misfortune. I called my people to a halt and we flew down to the tops of several trees, where this charitable bird was sighing.

‘I took so much pleasure in the sweetness of its sad songs, that in order to have more time and leisure to enjoy them, I had no desire to undeceive it. I invented a story on the spot, in which I related the imaginary misfortunes which had made me fall into the hands of this eagle. I brought in such amazing adventures, summoning up my passions so adroitly and choosing each note of my song so well, that the nightingale was beside itself.

‘We serenaded one another by turns with the musical stories of our mutual loves. In my airs I sang that I was not only comforted but that I even rejoiced at my disaster since it had won me the honour of being lamented in such beautiful songs. And the inconsolable little bird replied to me in its own that it would have accepted with joy all the esteem in which I held it, if it could have had the knowledge that this might make it worthy of the honour of dying in my place. But since fortune had not reserved so much honour for a wretch like itself, it would only accept as much of my esteem as was needed to save me from blushing to be its friend.
