On opening a box, I discovered in it a metal object, not unlike one of our clocks, which was filled with all manner of tiny springs and mysterious machines. It was a book indeed, but a miraculous book, with neither pages nor letters: it was, in short, a book where the eyes were useless for reading and for which only the ears were needed. When someone desires to ‘read,’ he winds up this machine with a great quantity of little threads of all kinds, then he turns the needle to the chapter he wishes to hear and at once there issue from it, as from the mouth of a man or from a musical instrument, all the distinct and different sounds which the great lunarians employ for the expression of their language.

When I have later reflected upon this miraculous invention for making books, I am no longer astonished to see how the young men in that country possessed more understanding at sixteen or eighteen than the greybeards do in ours, since, knowing how to read as soon as they can talk, they are never without reading matter. In their room, on a walk, in town, or on a journey they can carry some thirty of these books in their pockets or slung from their belts. They have only to wind upa spring in order to hear a single chapter, or several, indeed, if they are in a mood to listen to a whole book. ‘hus you can have all the great men, both dead and alive, perpetually about you, to address you viva voce.

This gift occupied me more than an hour. Finally, having attached them to myself in the form of ear pendants, I went out for a walk, but as soon as I had reached the end of the road, I met quite a large company of sorrowful people. Four of them were carrying a kind of coffin on their shoulders, draped in black. I enquired from a bystander the significance of this procession, so like the funeral ceremonies of my own

country. He replied that the wicked [a — , whose name

in the common people’s jargon was a fillip of the finger on the right knee, who had been convicted of envy and ingratitude, had deceased the day before and that Parliament had condemned him more than twenty years previously to die a natural death in his bed and then be buried after death.

I began to laugh at this reply and when he asked me why, I said: ‘You astonish me by saying that what are marks of blessedness in our world, such as a long life, a peaceful death and an honourable burial, should serve in this one as an exemplary punishment.’

‘What! You take burial for a mark of blessedness!’ this man retorted. ‘By your faith, can you conceive of anything more frightful than a corpse brim-full of crawling worms, at the mercy of the toads which gnaw at its cheeks—in short, the plague clothed in the body of a man? Good God! The very idea, even in death, of having one’s face smothered with a cloth and a clod of earth upon one’s mouth almost chokes my breath! This wretched man you see being carried has, in addition to the disgrace of being thrown into a ditch, been condemned to be accompanied in procession by a hundred and fifty of his friends. As a punishment for having loved an envious and ungrateful man, they are commanded to appear at his funeral with sad faces, and if the judges had not had pity on him, imputing his crimes partly to his meagre intelligence, they would have ordered that there should be weeping!

‘Apart from criminals, everyone here is burnt and it is a very decent and reasonable custom, for we believe that when the fire has separated the purities from the impurities, the heat draws together, by sympathetic attraction, all the natural warmth which made up the soul and gives it sufficient strength to rise steadily. When it has ascended as high as a star (which is in fact the earth of some peoples more immaterial and more intellectual than us, since their temperament must correspond and contribute to the purity of the globe they inhabit), the original flame is further refined by the subtlety of this world’s elements and it comes to form one of the citizens of this fiery country.

‘But this is still not our most beautiful method of sepulture. When one of our philosophers reaches an age at which he feels his mind growing weak and the ice of his years freezing the passions of his soul, he summons his friends to a sumptuous banquet. When he has explained his reasons for resolving to take leave of nature and the small hope there is of his adding anything more to his fine actions, he is either given grace, that is to say he is ordered to die, or else he is given a severe commandment to live. When his life’s breath has been put into his own hands by a majority vote, he informs his dearest friends of the time and place appointed. They purge themselves and fast for twenty-four hours and when they have arrived at the sage’s house and sacrificed to the sun, they enter the chamber where the noble man awaits them on a ceremonial bed. Each man wishes to embrace him and when it is the turn of the one he loves the best and he has kissed him tenderly, he supports him on his stomach, joins his mouth with the other man’s and with his right hand plunges a dagger into his own heart. The loved one does not remove his lips from those of his beloved until he feels him expire, and then he withdraws the steel from his breast and, closing the wound with his mouth, he drinks his blood, which he continues sucking until a second takes his place, then a third, a fourth and finally the whole company: and four or five hours afterwards a girl of sixteen or seventeen is brought to each of them and during the three or four days which they spend in tasting the pleasures of love, they are only nourished from the flesh of the dead man, which they are made to eat quite raw. Thus if anything may be born of a hundred embraces, they are assured that it is their friend who lives again.’

I interrupted this discourse by telling the speaker that these customs had much in common with those of a people in our world and continued my walk, which was so long that when I returned, dinner had been ready for two hours. I was asked why I had arrived so late.

‘It was not my fault,’ I replied to the cook, who was grumbling about it. ‘I frequently asked people the time in the streets but they only replied by opening their mouths, clenching their teeth and turning their faces askew.’

‘What!’ exclaimed all the company, ‘do you not know that in this way they are telling you the time?’
