I was beginning to fall asleep when I perceived a marvellous bird hovering in the air above my head. It kept aloft with a movement so slight and imperceptible that I several times wondered if it was not another little world, balanced by its own centre. However, it gradually descended and finally came so close to me that my uplifted eyes were quite filled with its image. Its tail appeared green, its belly a glossy blue, its wings crimson; and the movement of its purple head produced the glinting of a golden crown, whose rays sprang from its eyes.

For a long time it flew about in the sky and I kept my gaze glued to all its movements, with my whole being so completely screwed up and concentrated on the single operation of looking that it was hardly capable of listening at all to what the bird was saying as it sang.

As I gradually unwound from my ecstasy, I began to distinguish the syllables, words, and sentences that it uttered.

Here, as well as I can remember them, are the terms in
which it presented the tissue of its song.

‘You are a stranger,’ the bird trilled most pleasantly, ‘and you were born in the world of which I am a native. That secret inclination which draws us to our compatriots is the instinct which makes me want to impart to you the history of my life.

‘I can see you are racking your brains to understand how it is possible for me to explain myself to you in coherent speech, since although birds imitate your talk, they do not understand it. But then equally, when you imitate the barking of a dog or the song of a nightingale, you do not understand what the dog or the nightingale were saying. You may therefore deduce that this does not make either birds or men any less intelligent.

‘However, just as some of your number have been so enlightened that they understood and spoke our language— like Apollonius Tianeus, Anaximander, Aesop, and many whose names I will not repeat to you, because they have never come to your knowledge—so among us there are some who understand and speak your language. Many of these, it is true, only know the language of one nation, but just as there are birds that say nothing, some that merely warble, and others that can speak, so there are some even more gifted ones that have a command of all kinds of idioms. For myself, I have the honour to be among that small number.

‘Furthermore, you must know that nature has implanted a secret desire in birds, whichever world they are in, to fly to this one. Perhaps this yearning impulse is what makes us sprout wings, just as pregnant women produce in their children the image of things they longed for; or rather as people who long to know how to swim have been seen to plunge into rivers while fast asleep and to negotiate more skilfully than an experienced swimmer hazards they would not even have dared to look at when awake; or like that son of King Croesus, to whom a violent desire to speak in order to save his father suddenly gave the power of language; or, in short, like that old man who was cornered by his enemy and surprised without weapons and felt the horns of a bull growing on his forehead as the result of the desire inspired in him by a fury which resembled that of this animal.

‘When birds arrive at the sun, they make their way to the republic of their species—but I can see you are bursting to learn who I am. Where you come from they call me the phoenix. There is only one at a time in each world and it lives there for the space of a hundred years. At the end of a century, when it has delivered itself of a great egg upon some Arabian mountain amidst the cinders of its pyre (which is built of aloe branches, cinnamon, and incense), it takes flight and sets course towards the sun, the homeland to which its heart has long aspired. Indeed we make every effort to accomplish this journey sooner, but the weight of our eggs, whose shells are so thick that it takes a century for them to hatch, always retards the enterprise.

‘Ido not doubt that you would find this miraculous form of reproduction difficult to understand. I will therefore explain it to you. The phoenix is a hermaphrodite, but even among hermaphrodites it is still as rare as a phoenix, for...’

It stopped speaking for ten minutes and then added: ‘I can see that you suspect that what I have just told you is false; but if I am not speaking the truth, may I never land upon your globe without an eagle pouncing upon me.’

It remained hovering in the sky for some time more and
then flew off.

The amazement its story had caused me made me curious to follow it, and as it cut through the vastness of the heavens with an unhurried flight, my eyes and my feet could keep pace with it quite easily.

After about fifty leagues I found myself in a country so full of birds that their number almost equalled that of the leaves on the trees which held them. What surprised me even more was that these birds, instead of being alarmed at my approach, fluttered all round me. One twittered in my ear, another strutted about on my head and, to be brief, after their little antics had occupied my attention for a considerable time, I suddenly felt my arms burdened with more than a million of all kinds of species, which weighed so heavily upon me that I could not move them.

They held me in this state until I saw four large eagles arriving. Two of these gripped my legs with their talons and the other two my arms and thus they lifted me high into the air.

Among the crowd I noticed a magpie flying up and down and hither and thither in great haste, and I heard it calling out to me that I should not try to defend myself at all, since its companions were already contemplating poking my eyes out. This warning prevented any resistance I might have made, and so these eagles carried me more than a thousand leagues from there to a great wood, which was (so the magpie told me) the town where their king had his residence.

The first thing they did was to throw me into prison in the hollow trunk of a great oak tree, and a number of the sturdiest of them perched upon the branches, where they exercised the functions of a company of armed soldiers.

At the end of about twenty-four hours others came on guard to relieve them. While I awaited whatever disasters fortune was pleased to ordain for me in a state of deep melancholy, my charitable magpie kept me informed about everything that was going on.
