does nothing but flow along, sometimes hiding underground, you would not say that the river has great intelligence, because you know that it simply meets in its path the devices put there to produce all these masterpieces of artifice. Were the mill not situated on its course, it would not grind any wheat. Had it never encountered the clock, it would not tell the time. And if the little stream I mentioned had had the same encounters, it would have performed the same miracles. It is just the same with this fire, which moves by itself. Where it has met organs suited to the kind of vibration necessary for reasoning, it has reasoned. Where it has found those suited only to feeling, it has felt. Where it has found them suited for vegetating, it has vegetated. Morevoer, if one puts out this man’s eyes, which the fire of his soul causes to see, he will no longer see, just as our great clock will cease to mark the hours if you break the mechanism.

‘Lastly, these primary and indivisible atoms offer us a wheel on which the most problematical difficulties of physics will run smoothly. There is nothing, not even the operation of the senses, which I cannot easily explain by means of these little bodies. Let us begin with sight, which, as the most mysterious of them, is worthy of our first attempts.

“To my way of thinking, this occurs when the outer coats of the eye, which have openings in them similar to those in glass, send out the fire dust known as sight-rays and it is stopped by some Opaque matter which makes it rebound back to its home. On its way this dust meets the image of the object that repulsed it, which consists of nothing but an infinite number of tiny bodies continually and evenly given off by the subject observed, and it drives them back to our eye. You are sure to object to me that glass is an opaque body and very compact, yet nevertheless, instead of repulsing the first little bodies, it allows itself to be penetrated by them. But my answer to you is that the pores in glass are the same shape as the atoms of fire which pass through it: just as a wheat sieve is no good for sifting oats, nor an oats sieve for sifting wheat. Similarly a deal box, although it is thin and lets sounds through, is not penetrable to sight; whereas a piece of crystal is transparent and penetrable to sight, but one cannot touch things through gs

I could not help interrupting him here. ‘A great poet and philosopher of our world,’ I told him, ‘following Epicurus, who followed Democritus, has spoken of these little bodies almost in the way you have, so your discourse does not surprise me at all. Please tell me, when you continue, how you can explain by these principles the way one’s image 1s reflected in a mirror.’

‘That is quite easy,’ he replied. ‘You must picture these fires from your eye passing through the glass, encountering behind it a non-diaphanous body, which repulses them, and returning the way they came. Meeting more of these little bodies travelling evenly towards the mirror, they call them back to our eyes, from whence our imagination, being warmer than the other faculties of our soul, draws the most subtle of them and from them makes itself a portrait in miniature.

‘The operation of hearing is not more difficult to conceive and for the sake of brevity let us simply consider the case of the notes of a lute touched by the hands of a virtuoso. You will ask me how I can possibly perceive something so far away from me and which I cannot see at all. Does a sponge come out of my ears and soak up this music in order to bring it to me? Or does the musician beget another little musician inside my head with a little lute and instructions to sing the same tunes to me like an echo? No; the miracle is due to the fact that the plucked string strikes the air which is composed of little bodies and drives it into my brain, gently piercing it with these little bodily nothings. If the string is taut the note is high, because it drives the atoms more vigorously and once the organ is thus penetrated it furnishes my imagination with sufficient of them from which to make its picture. If it is not so taut, it happens that when our memory has not yet completed its image, we are obliged to repeat the same sound to it; so that, for example, from the materials furnished by the measures of a saraband, it takes enough to complete the portrait of this saraband.

‘But this operation is by no means as wonderful as those by which we are moved now to joy, now to anger with the aid of the same organ. This occurs when in the course of their movement the little bodies meet others inside us which are moving in the same manner, or whose own shape makes them suscep- tible to the same type of vibration. The new arrivals excite their hosts to imitate their motion and in this way when a violent tune encounters the fire of our blood, it makes it take up the same dance and excites it to thrust itself outwards, and that is what we call “the ardour of courage’. If the sound is sweeter and has only the strength to raise a lesser, more quavering flame, by causing this to travel along the nerves and membranes and through the apertures in our flesh, it excites that tickling sensation which we call “joy”. The other passions are aroused in the same way, according to the greater or lesser violence with which these little bodies are hurled at us, according to the motion resulting from their contact with other impulses and according to the mobility they find in us. So much then for hearing.

“The demonstration of the sense of touch is now no more difficult, if one imagines that there is a perpetual emission of little bodies from all palpable matter and that when we touch it, still more of them evaporate off it because they are squeezed out of the object—just like water from a sponge when we press it. The hard ones come to the organ of touch to make a report of their solidity, the supple ones of their softness, the rough ones, etc. Moreover, when our hands are worn with work they are no longer so sensitive to touch, for the thick callosity, being neither porous nor animated itself, only transmits these vapours of matter with great difficulty.
