Without waiting for his reply, I went up at once to the ingenious demon’s room and, dispensing with all preliminaries, I put before him the objection that had just been made to me concerning the immortality of our souls and here is how he answered me:

‘Well, my son, so this young hothead is eager to convince you that man’s soul is not likely to be immortal, since God, who calls Himself the common father of all beings, would not be so unjust as to have given one species all the advantages while generally abandoning the others to oblivion or unhappiness. These arguments, it is true, have a certain superficial brilliance. I could, of course, ask him how he knows that what is just for us, should also be just for God; how he knows that God measures Himself by our yardstick; how he knows that our laws and customs, which were instituted merely to remedy our own disorders, are also used to apportion God’s omnipotence. But I will pass over all these things, together with all that the Fathers of your Church have so divinely replied upon this matter and uncover a mystery which has hitherto never been revealed.

‘You know, O my son, how earth turns into a tree, the tree into a pig, the pig into a man. Can we not believe that, since all things in nature tend towards perfection, they all aspire to become men, this state being the achievement of the finest and best conceived compound in the world, because it is the only one which links the life of the brutes with that of the angels? Only a pedant will deny that these metamorphoses take place. We can see how the plum tree sucks up, as if with a mouth, and digests the surrounding turf by means of its inner heat. A pig devours the fruit and turns it into a part of itself and a man, by eating the pig, resuscitates this dead flesh, joins it to himself, and makes the animal live again, as a more noble species. Thus the great pontiff you see with a mitre on his head was perhaps sixty years ago a tuft of grass in my garden. If God is the common father of all His creatures, loving them all equally, is it not highly likely that when—by means of this metempsychosis, more logical than the Pytha- gorean—all sentient and vegetative beings and, in short, all matter has passed through man, then will come the great Day of Judgement, which the prophets make the culmination of all the secrets of their philosophy.’

I went down to the garden very satisfied and I was beginning to recite to my companion what our master had taught me, when the physiognomist arrived to conduct us to the dining room and the dormitory.

As soon as I was awake the following day, I went off to rouse my antagonist. ‘It is as great a miracle,’ I greeted him, ‘to find a powerful mind like yours entombed in sleep, as to see a flame standing still.’ This doubtful compliment caused him some discomfort.

‘But will you never,’ he cried in a rage, passionate with affection for me, ‘rid your lips and your brain of these mythical expressions like “miracle”? You should know that such names disgrace the name of philosopher and that as the wise man sees nothing in the world which he does not comprehend or judge capable of comprehension, he must abhor all such terms as “miracles”, “prodigies”, and ‘“‘unnatural events’, which stupid people have invented to excuse the feebleness of their own intellects.’

I then thought myself obliged in conscience to speak and undeceive him. ‘Even though you do not believe in miracles,’ I replied, ‘they happen just the same, many of them. I have seen them with my own eyes. I have known more than twenty sick men miraculously cured.’

“You say,’ he interrupted, ‘that these people were cured by a miracle, but you do not realize that the power of the imagination is capable of all the cures which you attribute to supernatural causes, on account of a certain natural balm, which is distributed throughout our bodies, containing antidotes to each of the illnesses which attacks us. This happens when our imagination, alerted by the pain, seeks out and selects the specific remedy and brings it to the poison. That is why, in our world, a good doctor will advise a sick man to go to an ignorant doctor, who is reputed to be clever, rather than to an able one with a reputation for ignorance. For he will be of the opinion that if our imagination works for our health, it is capable of curing us, providing it is aided by remedies, whereas the most powerful of these are too weak if the imagination does not come to their assistance.

‘Are you surprised that the first men in your world lived for so many centuries without any knowledge of medicine? No. And what do you think the reason could be, if it was not the original resilience of their constitutions and the universal balm—that your doctor’s drugs, which are now using you up, have still not succeeded in dissipating? In order to achieve convalescence in those days, they had only to desire it strongly and imagine themselves to be cured. Their vigorous imagination would plunge into this vital oil and draw forth the elixir, and by applying an active remedy to the passive disease, they found themselves as healthy as before, almost in the twinkling of an eye. Despite the corruption of nature, this still continues to happen today—although rather rarely, in fact—and the populace attribute it to a miracle. But for my part, I do not believe that at all, basing my opinion on the fact that it is easier for all the doctors to be mistaken than for this not to be so.

‘For I say to them: during the course of his illness it seems likely that this man, who has just recovered from a fever, very much desired to be cured and even made vows to this end. Now he was absolutely bound either to die, or to remain sick, or to get well. If he had died it would have been said that God wanted to recompense him for his suffering (or one might even indulge in malicious irony and say that He had indeed heard the sick man’s prayers and cured him of all his ills! ). If he had remained unwell it would have been said that he had no faith. But since he is cured it is “quite evidently” a miracle! Yet is it not much more probable that his imagination, excited by his violent desire for health, has done its work? In this example I let the man be cured, but why cry “miracle”, since we can see so many people who have also made vows, perishing miserably, along with their vows?’
